ANC’s obsession with moving statues during Covid-19 is like rearranging the deck chairs on the Titanic (Debate in Gauteng Legislature on the transformation of our heritage landscape) 5 November 2020 Earlier today during the debate in the Gauteng Legislature on the transformation of South Africa's heritage landscape, the FF Plus made it very clear that the ANC's intention of moving statues during the Covid-19 pandemic is the same as rearranging the deck chairs on the Titanic. The South African economy has an enormous income gap, which is only getting bigger and bigger, and the country also has the highest unemployment rate in all of its history. In light of this it is clear that the ANC is trying to cover up its lack of sound economic policy and outcomes by substituting symbolic bread for real bread. The FF Plus made this statement in response to a speech on the transformation of our heritage landscape by the Minister of Sport, Arts and Culture, Nathi Mthethwa, in the Gauteng Legislature. The Minister's statement that the people will revolt if the heritage landscape is not transformed was repudiated by the FF Plus. The truth is that the people are much more likely to revolt if they are left to starve and if the problem of unemployment is not addressed. There have already been protests against the ANC due to the unscrupulous Covid-19 corruption. Thus, economic growth needs urgent attention. The FF Plus does believe in having a responsible heritage policy. Such a policy should have certain core values. In the first place, heritage may not be used to demonise a specific race or group of people. Furthermore, history must be preserved so that we do not repeat the mistakes of the past. Any such heritage policy must also respect the various histories, cultures and languages in South Africa. If these values are taken seriously and are properly implemented, we will be able to create a vision for the future where everyone will respect one another. Issued by Anton Alberts, FF Plus national chairperson and MPL: Gauteng, 5 November 2020