Latest provincial school infrastructure reports show some progress in delivery, but education departments are failing miserably to comply with the 2020 deadline of the Norms and Standards for Public School Infrastructure 25 November 2020 “For me personally Norms and Standards for Public School Infrastructure are important because they ensure that public schools are catered for. They promote equality in education. Just because a school is public doesn't mean it should have minimum facilities. It shouldn't be quantity education but quality and equal education.” - Ntombi Mngomezulu, Grade 12 learner member of Equal Education (Equaliser), KwaZulu-Natal. The Norms and Standards for School Infrastructure are important because learners can't learn productively in schools that aren't safe for them to learn in. [Schools lack] laboratories, libraries, sports fields and those kinds of things. Schools in my area… lack so much of the things prescribed by the Norms and Standards. Some schools don't even have proper fencing.” - LikhoMendisi, Grade 11 learner member of Equal Education (Equaliser), Western Cape. With less than a week left before the 2020 deadline of the Norms and Standards for Public School Infrastructure, the latest government reports on progress with delivery show that there have been important wins since this law was adopted seven years ago, but government is very far behind in meeting its own targets. According to the Norms and Standards, all schools should have been provided with enough classrooms, electricity, water, and toilets, and with fences, telephones and internet by 29 November 2020 (this Sunday). Basic Education Minister Angie Motshekga signed the Norms and Standards into law in 2013, following years of tireless campaigning led by Equal Education members (learners, post-school youths, teachers and parents). Since then, thousands of schools have received water, electricity and decent toilets, and hundreds of schools made of inappropriate materials, such as mud and asbestos, have been replaced. Getting these victories has not been easy - we have had to carefully monitor the implementation of the law, mobilise affected school communities and take to the streets often to demand accountability. However, change is too slow - there are still huge backlogs, especially in our schools of Black working class and rural communities! The Department of Basic Education (DBE) and provincial education departments (PEDs) could have been much closer to fulfilling their legal, political and moral duty, but they have not shown the political will to ensure that our schools are fixed with the urgency needed. Our engagements with education departments, and our analysis of the latest provincial school infrastructure reports, show that the departments still struggle with the basics such as accurate and accessible data, clear and coordinated planning, as well as making sure that the implementing agents and contractors that build schools on behalf of government are held accountable. National and provincial governments are also not putting enough money toward building and fixing our schools. To access these reports, we had to submit a Promotion of Access to Information (PAIA) request to the DBE - even though the  #FixTheNorms court judgment of 2018 ordered Minister Motshekga to make the reports and plans public to ensure that learners, teachers and parents can hold the government accountable. The law requires the education MECs report to Minister Motshekga every year on their progress and plans to fix our schools. These reports also have the potential to be powerful tools for proper planning and budgeting between various government departments. The full copies of the provincial reports submitted to Minister Motshekga are available here. Issued by Jay-Dee Cyster, Communications Officer, Equal Education, 25 November 2020 