How Gauteng subsistence farmers are paying for the SAA bailout  16 November 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in Gauteng has learnt that critical funding is being taken away from the Gauteng Department of Agriculture and Rural Development in order to fund the bailout of SAA. This information was revealed in a presentation from Parliament to the Gauteng Provincial Legislature on the Division of Revenue Amendment Bill. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0']));The following conditional grants will be affected: - Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme Grant - Ilima/Letsema Project - Land Care Programme Grant: Poverty Relief and Infrastructure Grant According to the presentation, reductions amounting to R1.3 billion have been made in support of the R10.5 billion required for SAA in terms of the Business Rescue Plan. Reductions in provincial conditional grants are made proportionately across provinces. The Land Care Programme Grant: Poverty Relief and Infrastructure Grant are intended for a favourable and supportive agricultural services environment for the farming community, in particular subsistence and smallholder farmers within strategically identified grain, livestock and horticulture production areas. The Ilima/Letsema Project provides assistance to vulnerable South African communities to achieve an increase in agricultural production within strategically identified grain, livestock, horticulture and aquaculture production areas. The Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme Grant provides effective support services, and promotes and facilitates agriculture development by targeting beneficiaries of land reform, restitution and redistribution, and other black producers who have acquired land through private means and are engaged in value-adding enterprises domestically, or involved in export. These programmes will have their funding cut by the following amounts: - Comprehensive Agricultural Support Programme Grant – a reduction of R911 000 from R82.6 million to R81.7 million for 2020/21; - Ilima/Letsema Project Grant – a reduction of R306 000 from R25.7 million to R25.4 million for 2020/21;- Land Care Programme Grant: Poverty Relief and Infrastructure Grant – a reduction of R57 000 from R4.8 million to R4.7 million for 2020/21; It is worrying that subsistence farmers will now have to forego the opportunity to acquire piggery or poultry structures, plant crops and contributions to sustainable land care to the tune of nearly R1.4 million rand. This is a slap in the face of Gauteng farmers who are already struggling with climate change, food insecurity, crime and inequality. These farmers will in all likelihood never be able to afford a plane ticket, yet they are helping to bail out SAA. It is clear that government is not thinking about how these bailouts will affect the lives of the poor and the vulnerable is South Africa- their lives are made a little harder so that the ANC can fund their vanity projects. Farming contributes enormously to the GDP and there is a need to ensure that farmers are provided with the necessary funding they deserve. Choosing SAA over farming clearly means that the ANC government cares little about growing a sustainable economy. I will be tabling further questions in the Gauteng Provincial Legislature to ascertain exactly how government will be helping farmers considering the reduced funding in conditional grants. Issued by Ina Cilliers, DA Gauteng Spokesperson for Agriculture and Rural Development, 16 November 2020