Mabuza and Ramaphosa must visit Sol Plaatje 9 November 2020 Note to Editors: Please find attached soundbites in English & Afrikaans from Delmaine Christians, MP. See pics here, here, here and here. The Democratic Alliance (DA) will hold deputy president David Mabuza to his word, in respect of his promise to visit Kimberley to get to the root of the city’s water, sewerage and other challenges. Mabuza promised this in response to a question that I posed to him during the recent National Council of Provinces (NCOP) Week. In respect of Kimberley’s recent water shutdown that lasted five days instead of three, in addition to the looming threat of nightly water cuts that seem to have become an annual occurrence in the hot summer months, as well as frequent sewerage spills in the city, I asked the deputy president whether government would institute an intervention in the city. Mabuza’s commitment to visit the city to investigate in person, so that he can provide me with an answer in black and white, is cautiously welcomed. It is time that the whole country is reminded about what a disappointment Sol Plaatje municipality has become. I am, however, concerned that the deputy president seems to think that the implementation of the District Development Model, currently being punted by government, is the solution to all local municipal problems. The problem in Sol Plaatje rests with political interference, appointing people who are not fit for purpose, and turning a blind eye to corruption. Hence, if government fails to address these main causes of municipal dysfunction, then there will be no improvement in the way Sol Plaatje is run. The DA suggests that Mabuza also invites President Cyril Ramaphosa, who still owes Kimberley a return visit to check on the condition of the city after the eye-opening visit he had at the beginning of the year, where he lambasted Sol Plaatje Municipality for the pitiful state of Kimberley. I daresay the dirty, neglected and potholed city looks much worse now than it did for the ANC’s January 8 statement. Ramaphosa and Mabuza would undoubtedly be disheartened by what they were to find. If Mabuza is at all serious about service delivery, and not just about politicking ahead of next year’s local government elections, he must come to Kimberley this year still, before the December holidays, and before residents are again plunged into more waterless conditions due to Sol Plaatje’s chronic mismanagement of its water infrastructure. Residents of Kimberley are at their wits end. They are tired Sol Plaatje failing them. They are tired of water cuts and the stench of sewerage always permeating the air. They deserve much better than what the ANC is delivering. Issued by Delmaine Christians, DA Member of the NCOP, 9 November 2020