Full re-opening of international travel welcomed 12 November 2020 We welcome the announcement by President Cyril Ramaphosa last night that the ‘red list’ will be scrapped and international travel to all countries will resume, subject to the necessary health protocols and the presentation of a negative Covid-19 certificate. We have been calling for the ‘red list’ to be scrapped from day one, as it was killing our key source markets for tourism in the Western Cape ahead of the summer season and causing much confusion and uncertainty for the travel and tourism industry which has been hard-hit by the Covid-19 pandemic. The relaxation of the restrictions on the sale of alcohol will also be welcomed by the wine tourism sector who will now be able to resume cellar door sales on weekends. As we have done since the start of the Covid-19 pandemic, we will continue to support businesses in the Western Cape, especially tourism businesses, as we move forward and focus on our economic recovery so that we can save jobs in the Western Cape. We know times are tough, but if you can, please go out and support our businesses in the Western Cape, particularly those in the tourism and hospitality sector. We can do this simply by enjoying the natural beauty, award-winning food and wine, rich cultural heritage and diverse and affordable travel options available to all in the Western Cape. And please remember to do so safely. The summer season is an important time for celebration and festivities with families and friends, even more so after the difficult year we have been through. But please do continue to do everything you can to adhere to the health and safety guidelines to protect yourself and your loved ones from Covid-19. Together we will stay safe and we will move forward in the Western Cape. Issued by Francine Higham, Spokesperson for the Provincial Minister of Finance and Economic Opportunities(Responsible for the Provincial Treasury and the Department of Economic Development and Tourism), 12 November 2020