Reinstatement of former MEC proof that GBV is not a priority for ANC Mpumalanga 26 November 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) strongly condemns the decision by the ANC in Mpumalanga to reinstate a Provincial Executive Committee (PEC) member who has been accused of raping his own daughters. This proves beyond reasonable doubt that the governing party does not take Gender-Based Violence (GBV) seriously. The former MEC of Finance in the province is currently out on R20 000 bail after he was arrested on Monday, 28 September 2020, over allegations that he and his stepson raped his 8-year old twin-daughters. Immediately after the arrest, the ANC suspended the former MEC from its PEC. In a shocking turn of events, the ANC decided to reinstate the politician this week. The party has justified this decision by claiming that he has a right to participate in party activities while the ANC at national level is still busy dealing with the issue of asking members who are accused of corruption and serious criminal offences to step down. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0']));The DA views this decision as a complete disregard of the severity of these allegations as well as the dignity of his alleged victims. It is also a slap in the of all victims of GBV. By reinstating the PEC member the ANC has highlighted the failure of the party to combat the scourge of GBV within its own ranks. When the ANC speaks of addressing South Africa’s second pandemic, it’s only to pay lip service. They have no political will, both internally and in government, to root these heinous crimes out of our society. Instead of sending out a strong message that politicians must not use their positions in society to abuse young children and women, the ANC empowers a cadre accused of the most heinous of crimes. In order to combat GBV and femicide, a whole society approach is required which include government, law enforcement agencies, communities, civil society and political parties. The DA has committed itself to end GBV not only during this 16 days of activism, but beyond. Whether internally, in opposition or in government, the will continue to push for real change to protect our women and children. A timeline of the DA’s proposals and interventions can be viewed here: https://www.da.org.za/16-days-of-activism Issued by Annerie Weberm, DA Women's Network (DAWN) Chair in Mpumalanga, 26 November 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_4',115,'0','0'])); 