NEC of MKMVA reflecting the discussion and decisions that were taken during day-long sitting of the NEC 30 November 2020 The Umkhontho we Sizwe Military Veterans Association (MKMVA) held a National Executive Committee (NEC) meeting on Friday the 27th of November 2020, at Luthuli House, the Head Office of the African National Congress (ANC). The MKMVA NEC meeting assessed the roll-out of the Programme of Action that we announced at a media conference on the 18th of August 2020. In doing so MKMVA re-affirmed our commitment to work for principled unity in the ANC, and to stamp out any factionalism, including the selective application of the law, and any actions by law enforcement agencies, that can be construed to be the selective targeting of political opponents. MKMVA confirmed our commitment to fight corruption in a comprehensive and even handed manner. The NEC of MKMVA furthermore expressed its concern about the continuation of factional politics within the ANC, and that this is sadly also still expressed within the National Executive Committee (NEC) of the ANC. In this regard MKMVA called on all the members ANC NEC to take the lead to lynch the scourge of factionalism, and to unite the ANC. In line with the sentiments expressed in the MKMVA NEC media statement of the 18th of August, MKMVA reiterated again that in accordance with our historical role as the most committed cadres of the ANC, and the defenders of our revolution, we will continue to work tirelessly to defend the integrity of the ANC, and to ensure that the ANC will fulfil its historical role as the pre-eminent Liberation Movement committed to the full liberation of all black (especially African) South Africans. The MKMVA NEC resolved to write to the National Office Bearers (NOB'S), requesting for an urgent meeting to raise our concerns about the continuing lack of unity in the ANC. We hope that our request be will met with the required urgency to meet. In the context of pursuing unity in the ANC MKMVA noted the legal advice that the ANC National Office Bearers (NO 'S) received that the ANC has no powers to force leaders who are charged, but who have not been found guilty in a court of law, to step aside. It has been our view throughout that neither in terms of the ANC Constitution, or the Constitution of our country, such powers exist, and that the Constitutional maxim that every citizen is deemed innocent until proven guilty in a court of law must prevail. The MKMVA NEC feels vindicated that this view was confirmed by Senior Council. For the sake of unity in the ANC we make an earnest appeal on all members of the NEC not to try force this deeply divisive issue any further, and to allow themselves to be led by the legal council that they have received. The MKMVA NEC has also noted with deep concern the very unwise decision by Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo to file legal charges against President Jacob Zuma, after his Senior Council, Advocate MuziSikhakhane, informed the Deputy Chief Justice that President Zuma will excuse himself. We are aware that Deputy Chief Justice Zondo was placed under severe pressure by several foreign funded NGO's, and other reactionary forces that advise him, to take this ill-advised step that can lead to the arrest of President Zuma. We have also noted that several of these same reactionary forces, and many in the mainstream White Monopoly Capital (WMC) media, have been for pushing for exactly such an arrest. While MKMVA respects the Commission of Enquiry into State Capture, we would like to advise Deputy Judge Zondo that that he will do well not to follow through on the perilous road that he has embarked upon. President Jacob Zuma was our highly regarded Patron and Commander in Chief. It must be clearly understood that MKMVA, and a large part of the population of South Africa, will not take kindly to him being arrested. If the Commission of Enquiry into State Capture persists with a warrant of arrest - and a subsequent arrest - a situation will be created that neither the Commission, nor anyone else will be able to control. It is our firm belief that the Radical Economic Transformation (RET) Resolutions that had been adopted by the 54th National Conference of the ANC, must - like all the Resolutions of our ANC National Conferences - without any further delay be fully implemented. The NEC of MKMVA noted with concern that there are attempts to either water-down these resolutions, or to further delay (or even postpone) their implementation. This should be avoided at all costs, because it will in a seriously negative way impact on the integrity of the ANC, and undermine the democratic principles that our ANC Constitution binds every member to. The Resolutions in question were democratically adopted by the majority of ANC branch delegates, and therefore must be adhered to. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_3',115,'0','0']));There can be absolutely no compromise about this. The MKMVA NEC noted that with regards to the Resolutions of the 54th National Conference of the ANC, MKMVA set an example in having accepted the Resolution to work for unity within the ex-MK combatant family. Although MKMVA had serious reservations to engage with the MK National Council (which is a parallel structure with no constitutional grounds for its existence), in the six-aside process to work for unity under the auspices of the Peace and Stability Sub-Committee of the ANC NEC, we did so as disciplined liberation soldiers and ANC members. Throughout MKMVA diligently continued to participate in the six-aside unity talks. Because of our discipline, and commitment, an all inclusive MK Unity Conference was on the verge of being held when the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic delayed it. In the period since then MK National Council informed the Chair of the NEC Peace and Stability Committee, comrade Tony Yengeni, that they are withdrawing from the six-aside unity process. In doing so they launched entirely unreasonable and vitriolic attacks on comrade Yengeni. The NEC of MKMVA would like to put on record that comrade Yengeni did his best under difficult circumstances, and he should be saluted for his efforts to bring the MK unity Resolution of the ANC 54th National Conference close to the point of successful implementation. We are still waiting to be briefed by the Peace and Stability Committee of the NEC to hear if anything more had been said to the Committee, than the pronouncements that have been made to the media, by MK National Council. It is indeed very unfortunate that the extensive programme that MKMVA had ready since 2017, for addressing the plight of MK veterans, has been delayed because of the six-aside unity talks. We have lost precious time, while our members are suffering, and their needs have not been addressed. We can no longer allow this programme to be delayed any further. The poverty and deprivation that many MK cadres are languishing under are well known, and an utter shame. Many liberation soldiers who have dedicated their lives to the liberation of South Africa do not have jobs, adequate housing, medical care and their dependants, wives and children, are not taken care of as envisaged by the Military Veterans Act 18 of 2011. The increase in protest action and marches by ex-MK combatants is a legitimate expression of their justified anger and frustration. eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-banner-1','ezslot_1',116,'0','0']));As MKMVA we can no longer allow any further delays in urgently addressing their needs. It is our intention to now proceed with our programme to decisively address the needs of our members. In this regard we are engaging with Deputy President David Mabuza, who has been appointed by President Cyril Ramaphosa to address the concerns of military veterans, in order to bring the serious challenges that our members are faced with to his attention and to find solutions. It is our ardent hope that these engagements will lead to a situation where the awful plight of many of our MKMVA members will be taken seriously, and urgently addressed. Because of the MK unity process many provincial and regional structures of MKMVA have - in line with the request from the ANC NEC - delayed holding their conferences in anticipation of the MK Unity Conference. The MKMVA NEC resolved that those MKMVA conferences in provinces and regions that are consequently overdue, must now be held as a matter of urgency. It is our intention as MKMVA to continue to work for unity among the ranks of MK veterans, and that is the spirit in which we will pursue the holding of these conferences. The MKMVA NEC will formally write to the Secretary General of the ANC, comrade Ace Magashule, to lift that ban on the holding of conferences. As part of facilitating this process MKMVA NEC members will visit the various provinces and regions of MKMVA throughout the length and breadth of the country. It was further noted that another unfortunate consequences of the MK unity process was that the South African National Military Veterans Association (SANMVA) was delayed in anticipation of the MK Unity Conference. The MKMVA NEC agreed that it is now ready for the SANMVA Conference to proceed, and that it must be held as a matter of urgency. The NEC of MKMVA also re-affirmed our commitment the economic empowerment of MK veterans. Those national, provincial and local government structures that are acting in accordance with the provisions of the Military Veterans Act of 2011 are commended. However, it was noted that these are the exceptions rather than the rule, and it is urgent that those in government structures at all levels who are failing to implement the specific provisions for job creation and the economic empowerment of MK veterans, should as a matter of the utmost urgency do so. Where they fail to do so they must be challenged, and named and shamed. The integrity and caring nature of a liberated country such as ours will always be judged by how our liberators are treated. In this regard the continuing protest action and marches by MK veterans until their legitimate demands are met, will continue to be supported by MKMVA, and where appropriate MKMVA will organise such marches and protest action, and participate in them. The MKMVA NEC resolved that it is important that MKMVA Executive Members should have full sitting rights in all the regional, provincial and national structures of the ANC - with specific reference to the Provincial General Councils (PGC’s), Provincial Executive Committees (PEC’s), and the National Executive Committee (NEC) of the ANC. In the instances where this is already the case it is welcomed. However, in the instances where it is not, MKMVA will engage with the ANC in order toformalise such arrangements. It was furthermore resolved that the MKMVA NEC will engage the ANC about further formalising and extending MKMVA’s participation in ANC conferences at all levels to have the status as full voting delegates, and to bring an end to the entirely inadequate observer status that is currently granted to us. The MKMVA NEC noted that in line with the historical development of MK from its inception, every MKMVA member is a member of the ANC. This reality must at all times be given expression in the active participation of MKMVA members in ANC branches and all other ANC structures. As well-trained cadres, many of whom are political commissars, MKMVA members have made a huge contribution to the ANC, and this must continue - and should even be expanded. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-leader-1','ezslot_6',118,'0','0']));All our MKMVA members are urged to participate fully in the arrangements for the upcoming National General Council (NGC), and to participate actively in the policy discussions - based on the NGC Discussion Documents that have been released on the 20th of November 2020. It is the ardent believe of the MKMVA NEC that our members will greatly enrich these discussions as ANC members in their respective branches, and will indeed make an invaluable contribution. Next year is very important year in the history of Umkhonto we Sizwe (MK). We will be celebrating the 60th Anniversary of the formation of MK on the 16th of December 1961. MKMVA as the constitutional structure to which the banners, colours and rich liberation military history of MK had been formally entrusted, will take the lead in these extremely important celebrations. We will do so together with the ANC, and the programme of celebrations - throughout the whole year - must be led by MKMVA and the ANC. On the 16 of December this year (2020) MKMVA will celebrate our 59th Anniversary by holding Provincial rallies - instead of a large national rally. We do so in adherence to COVID-19 regulations that are still in place. At these celebrations we will announce the theme for the major 60th Anniversary celebrations that will take place next year. The 60th MK Anniversary must be adequately reflected in the upcoming January 8th Statement of the ANC, and in all functions and celebrations of the ANC. The NEC of MKMVA resolved to engage the Secretary General of the ANC, comrade Ace Magashule, in order to jointly develop a comprehensive programme of remembrance and celebration. The MKMVA NEC noted with dismay the recent attacks, abusive language and downright vitriol, that had been directed against MKMVA and our members. This is entirely unacceptable, and can certainly not be tolerated as we proceed to celebrate the 60th Anniversary of our glorious People’s Liberation Army. The MKMVA NEC calls on the ANC to reign in ANC members who make themselves guilty of such reactionary and dastardly behaviour. In the instances where this persists, we expect of the ANC to take the necessary disciplinary steps against members who attack MK and MKMVA. In conclusion MKMVA reiterates its commitment to forge unity in the ANC, and to work tirelessly for the full - also economic - liberation of our people. Issued by the National Executive Committee (NEC) of MKMVA Update: Issued by Carl Niehaus, NEC Member of MKMVA and National Spokesperson, 30 November 2020 