DA calls for sacking of corrupt Joburg Mayor 27 November 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) calls on Johannesburg Mayor Geoff Makhubo to step down following his appearance at the State Capture Commission this morning on serious and substantiated allegations of fraud and corruption. Evidence against him is overwhelming and he should be immediately removed from office. It is alleged that Makhubo’s company Molelwane Consulting received R30 million in bribes from Regiments Capital, a firm deeply implicated in state capture, all in exchange for maintaining so-called strategic relationships with the City of Johannesburg, during his tenure as Member of the Mayoral Committee (MMC) on Finance. Furthermore, Makhubo is alleged to have solicited regular donations worth millions from Information Technology company, EOH Holdings, while he was the ANC Johannesburg Treasurer and Finance MMC, all in exchange for tenders at the City of Johannesburg. It is unacceptable that a company that does millions of rands of business with the City should be funding political campaigns. The residents of Johannesburg are being led by a man tainted with corruption. It is now time for the Hawks, the NPA and other law enforcement agencies to pay Makhubo a visit. They should use the amendments gazetted by the President in July this year, which allows law enforcement agencies to use evidence given before the State Capture Commission to arrest those who contributed to the state capture. The DA believes the allegations against Makhubo are just the tip of the iceberg, and there is a lot more corruptive activity lurking under the surface. The system of political paybacks cannot be left unattended and be allowed to continue, as it has for decades, under the ANC in the City of Johannesburg. The DA will continue to fight for every cent that has been stolen through looting in the City of Johannesburg, and ensure that Makhubo and those implicated are brought to book. We call on all residents to support our efforts to root out corruption in the City of Johannesburg. Issued by Tsepo Mhlongo, DA Johannesburg Regional Chairperson, 27 November 2020 