ANC set on stealing by-election through land grabs 5 November 2020 The upcoming by-election in Ward of 16, in Emfuleni has been derailed by the establishment of an informal settlement in the area, with all evidence pointing to the ANC candidate having coordinated the invasion of municipal owned land during the lockdown when evictions were outlawed. The informal settlement, adjoining Rust-ter-Vaal, has flourished during the lockdown, and while the municipality has voiced their dissatisfaction, and intention to remove the informal settlement, the ANC councillor candidate has reportedly approached the South African Human Rights Commission to prevent the eviction of the invading residents. The invasion added over 900 voters to the voters roll at the recent registration weekend. All indications are that the by-election is set to be stolen through this sudden and questionable influx of voters to the ward. The ward, which includes Rust-ter-Vaal, Arcon Park and Waldrift has always been hotly contested by various political parties. The previous ward councillor resigned in late 2019 due to ill health, and the by-election, initially scheduled for 18 March 2020, had to be postponed due to the restrictions imposed by the lockdown. The Democratic Alliance (DA) maintains that, while it is imperative that citizens be given the right to vote where they live, the establishment of this large, illegal and unsustainable informal settlement is a ploy to steal the by-election. A recent visit to the settlement has confirmed that many of the shacks have been erected but not yet occupied. The DA will be lodging objections to the Independent Electoral Commission as this by-election will certainly not meet the “Fair” requirement in the “Free and Fair Election” test. In an effort to counter the manipulation of the election, the DA calls on every voter who is correctly registered in ward 16 to go out and vote for the DA on 11 November. The last thing that residents of Emfuleni deserve is a stronger ANC stranglehold over the failing ANC-led Municipal Council. Issued byDennis Ryder,DA Vaal Regional Chairperson, 5 November 2020