ANC STATEMENT ON BY-ELECTION RESULTS 12 November 2020 The African National Congress is humbled by the confidence the voters continue to demonstrate in its leadership, as demonstrated by the outcomes of the 95 by-elections held on 11 November 2020. These by-elections, on the eve of the 2021 local government elections are an important yardstick in measuring the resonance of our message with the electorate. As we continue on the path of renewal and hope, the ANC-led government remains hard at work in accelerating service delivery and improving the lives of our people. ANC conducted a people led and centred approach on candidate selection and campaign that was consistent with our renewal process. This ensured humility, process integrity and a people centred campaign. The growth of the ANC support from 65 wards in 2016 to 70 of the 95 wards contested in these by-elections is a humbling outcome that we dare not take for granted. - In the Eastern Cape, the ANC retained 18 wards and lost 1 ward to the DA. - In Free State, the ANC retained its 3 wards. - In Gauteng the ANC retained its 10 wards and won extra 2 wards from the DA. - In KwaZulu-Natal, the ANC retained 3 wards and won 1 from NFP and lost 1 ward to the IFP in Nkandla. - In Limpopo, the ANC retained all its 4 wards. - In Mpumalanga, the ANC retained its 3 wards. - In North-West, the ANC retained its 4 wards and won 1 ward from the DA. - In the Northern Cape, the ANC retained all its 17 wards and won 2 wards from the DA. - In the Western Cape, the ANC retained its 2 wards. While we believe that we are making progress in infusing the Khawuleza ethos in service delivery, much more still needs to be done. The COVID-19 pandemic had a significant impact in slowing down our pace and diminishing the resources at our disposal. However, we remain committed to advancing our objectives as part of the new normal. We remain steadfast in our commitment to growing South Africa together and making a better life for all a lived reality. We continue to demonstrate this commitment in our actions ranging from tackling corruption to accelerated delivery of social and economic infrastructure. We thank all South Africans who came out to cast their votes and further strengthen our democracy. Our heartfelt gratitude goes to the hundreds of volunteers who reached out to the voters across the length and breath of our country and ensured that the ANC remains the people's choice. Statement issued by ANC Head of Elections, Fikile Mbalula, 12 November 2020