Minister Fritz condemns spate of murders over the past weekend 9 November 2020 The Minister of Community Safety, Albert Fritz, condemns in the strongest terms the reported murders which took place over the past weekend. Minister Fritz furthers calls on SAPS to leave no stone unturned in their investigations and ensure that guilty parties are brought to book. Over the past weekend there were reports of shootings and stabbings, which resulted in the deaths of several residents. These took place in Manenberg, Kraaifontein, Clarkes Estate, Atlantis and Kalkfontein. Among the victims over the past weekend include: A 29-year-old man who was killed in Takudi Street, Wallacedene on Saturday at approximately 5pm, by an unknown suspect; A teenager from Clarkes Estate was reportedly shot on Saturday night; A 17-year old man was reportedly shot and killed in Greenwood Avenue, Clarkes Estate on Saturday at 20:20pm; A grade 10 pupil from Robinvale High School was reportedly stabbed to death on Friday night in Atlantis; An 18-year-old man was stabbed to death in an apparent domestic-related incident in Elizabeth Street in Kalkfontein on Saturday at approximately 18.50pm; and A man was reportedly shot and killed in Manenberg on Sunday morning. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_1',115,'0','0']));Minister Fritz said, “Amid the violence and criminal activity that we have seen over the past weekend, I welcome the increased levels of coordination and cooperation between SAPS, Metro Police, City of Cape Town law enforcement and LEAP law enforcement officers in areas including Hanover Park. It is important that we take a united front against crime. We are seeing a tangible difference in the reduced levels of violent crime, including shooting incidents.” Minister Fritz continued, “I welcome the arrest of four suspects in Cofimvaba in the Eastern Cape on Sunday, 8 November, in connection with a number of mass shootings in the province and I commend the extensive investigations undertaken by Western Cape SAPS detectives with the support of crime intelligence and Eastern Cape SAPS on the four arrests. Over the past week, the City’s enforcement agencies have also made 142 arrests and impounded vehicles, cellphones, recovered drugs, firearms and ammunition and issued 70 902 fines.” Minister Fritz added, “The rampant criminality and spate of murders that we see across the province is completely inexcusable. It is truly shameful that on a week-to-week basis, we start a-new by reviewing the most recent spate of murders. As a society, we are plagued by violence and poor conflict resolution. This is demonstrated in that incidents of gang-related turf wars, robberies, domestic and interpersonal disputes too often result in murder.” Minister Fritz added further, “In many of cases, SAPS investigations are ongoing. I therefore call on anyone with any information in these matters to immediately come forward and report such to their local SAPS, call Crime Stop on 08600 10111 or use the MySAPS cellphone application. I further call on SAPS to leave no stone unturned in their investigations and ensure that guilty parties are brought to book.” Issued by Cayla Ann Tomás Murray, Spokesperson for Minister Albert Fritz, 9 November 2020