Statement by JG Zuma Foundation on Zondo Commission The JG Zuma Foundation expresses its disappointment that the Chairperson of the Zondo Commission missed the opportunity offered to him by President Zuma's counsel during oral submissions on 16 November 2020. Equally disturbing is the fact that the Chairperson failed to realize that as soon as his unusual statement was contradicted, he could not be the arbiter of his own dispute. We are also gravely concerned at the reports that when President Zuma's legal team went to see the Chairperson in chambers they found the Chairperson with Ngcukaitobi SC, whose role in the Chairperson's chambers was not explained. It is disturbing that the Chairperson allowed such irregularities to occur in this matter. We stand by President Zuma and commend him for his firm stance of walking away from the Commission. It is indeed a comedy of errors, floundering from one error to the next. We commend President Zuma for risking it all in order not to legitimize an irregular process disguised as a legitimate Commission. We call on all supporters of President Zuma as he faces criminal proceedings being plotted by the Evidence Leaders, and the Chairperson irregularly assisted by Ngcukaitobi SC, who also represents other parties appearing before the same Commission. We know that President Zuma and his team took this brave stance because they were not prepared to be bullied and elected to terminate their participation regardless of the risk of contempt proceedings. President Zuma assures us that he would rather face jail than allow himself to be bullied by an irregular, manipulated and unlawful process. We hope that the Chairperson is aware that those pulling the strings behind the scenes do not have his interests at heart and will drop him as quickly as they picked him. President Zuma's counsel repeatedly implored the Commission to be responsible but all these attempts were in vain as the forces behind the scenes were prepared to risk it all, including the integrity of the Chairperson, to achieve their nefarious goals. They can spin what happened all they like, their evil intentions were thwarted and prejudice blinded them. We are behind President Zuma all the way, no matter what they try to destroy him. They will fail. Issued by the Jacob Gedleyihlekisa Mhlanganyelwa Zuma Foundation, 19 November 2020