ONE SOUTH AFRICA Monday 2 November 2020 Today we introduce SA's first Basic Income Grant pilot project to tackle inequality in South Africa Today the One South Africa Movement (OSA) joins forces with NPC "RightfulShare: an income movement" to unveil South Africa's first ever Basic Income Grant model to tackle income inequality in the country. This model seeks to put an end to "trickle down" redress and usher in a new era of direct redress in order to assist communities across South Africa. What is RightfulShare? RightfulShare is a targeted, unconditional cash grant, paid by changing the manner in which the current Black Economic Empowerment (BEE) Scorecard works — so that money is paid directly into the hands of self-identified South Africans, aged 18 to 59 years, who have been economically excluded and who are struggling to make ends meet. RightfulShare is aligned to the Upper-Bound-Poverty line, not means-tested and financed through changing the BEE scorecard in favour of a model that allows for direct cash transfers to be paid to beneficiaries. It is done in recognition of our country's past and the impact of digitalisation on the economy and work. The model is to be piloted next year. The solution to socio-economic injustice should always have been the decentralisation of power — down to the individual level. We must deal with income deprivation directly by ensuring more money in people's pockets at grassroots level to boost local economies. The efficiency gains of such a model are far reaching. Not only do children have access to better nutrition due to higher household cashflow, but local economies grow from the ground up due to higher consumer spend. How will it be funded? Large companies with annual turnover of more than R50 million will pay 10% of their net after-tax profit into a `RightfulShare fund', from which the proposed 'RightfulShare' is paid. A business is 100% compliant when they have done this, and all other BEE requirements fall away. It meets the criteria of certainty, clarity and simplicity, all of which investors like, and there is no place for corruption to take place. All indirect costs associated with the implementation of BEE and compliance monitoring fall away. Why is the Pilot Project important? We are in the midst of a socio-economic crisis. The huge growth in income and wealth disparities is morally unacceptable, hinders economic growth, and fuels corruption. Real wages have stagnated or fallen and the devastating impact of the coronavirus has exposed the dated and inept social safety net. Economic insecurity is the order of the day. Stressed and debt-ridden, most South Africans are just trying to survive. And, on top of this, the ongoing technological revolution will undoubtedly bring more disruption. These conditions are fertile grounds for populist leaders who incite blame, violence, and racial hatred to further their own political agenda. In the Indian pilot, the security provided by the promise of a regular cash grant gave many people a sense of hope and renewed energy. Author and Vice-President of Basic Income Earth Network, Sarath Davala, in his book "Basic Income: A Transformative Policy for India" found that on the whole, recipients reduced their debt, increased their savings, and doubled their economy activity. He will also be involved in the South African pilot. Now, more than ever, South Africa needs a socio-economic plan, and a more hopeful view of our country and each other. Evidence suggests that an unconditional basic income, as part of a package of policies, can help us weather the above storm. So, let us test it. How will the Pilot Project work? Each month, 120 people will receive R1200 on top of any income they may make — unconditionally, for 18 months. The project will be independently evaluated against specified criteria and supplemented with an economic impact simulation study. In addition, individual case studies will culminate in a book about the project. The pilot project will be privately funded by initial investors, in order to demonstrate to the South African public that the model is feasible and sustainable in the long term. South Africans aged 18 to 59, living in a small rural town, who feel they have been economically excluded or are unable to make ends meet, will apply via the RightfulShare website to participate in the monthly randomized selection process. This will start in March 2021. An applicant is assigned a ballot number and every month 10 ballot numbers are drawn at random. Each number drawn wins a 'RightfulShare' (R1200 monthly cash grant) for 18 months. The monthly selection draws will be live streamed. How does it differ from existing Social Grants or the COVID-19 Grant? RightfulShare, when government policy, will be distributed alongside existing grants (with the exception of the COVID-19 relief grant and the caregiver grant). Through its implementation, it will actually work towards bringing our social assistance system in line with the requirements of the 21st century. There are three things that are problematic with the current grant system: 1. Misconception that the ANC is a big supporter of social grants — they are not. They are a deeply patriarchal, conservative party obsessed with workfare; 2. The arbitrary financial value of the grants; and 3. Persons between the ages of 18-59 receive no social assistance. RightfulShare will restore the integrity of the grant system and allow current grants to do what they are supposed to do. RightfulShare is linked to an objective measure — the upper-bound-poverty line. As a result, its financial value is much higher. RightfulShare is not means-tested, instead, it is rolled out in terms of standard age categories. It is paid through changing the BEE scorecard as opposed to being financed through worker pockets and it is paid in recognition of our countries past and the changing nature of the economy and work. It is more about creating an equal and just society as oppose to poverty alleviation alone. Conclusion As income inequality continues to increase in South Africa and across the world, a Basic Income Grant is imminent. Over 80 organizations in South Africa are in favour of the introduction of some form of Basic Income Grant. We believe that our model will go a long way to addressing inequality in South Africa, and will lobby each of these organization to support our model going forward. It's high time we put an end to "trickle down" redress and usher in a new era of direct redress in order to assist communities across South Africa. Karen Jooste Founder: RightfulShare Issued by One South Africa movement, 2 November 2020