More money not the answer to SANDF’s problems 26 November 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) takes note of the worrying report that the South African Defence Force’s (SANDF) capabilities and prime mission equipment have deteriorated and the Minister of Defence and Military Veterans, NosiviweMapisa-Nqakula’s claims that the only solution to the problem is to increase her budget. The situation at SANDF is such that there is an increasing risk that it won’t be able to protect the country’s integrity. At the moment, the South African fleet has almost no means to protect our maritime territory and resources, and the air force also lacks the resources to assist in maritime patrolling and exploring. The Minister’s insistence that the only solution to this problem is throwing money at it, shows simple ignorance of the ANC government’s failed economic policy over the past years. There is simply no more money to bail SANDF out, and the little money there is, is being wasted on pet projects like the South African Airways (SAA). Instead of fighting National Treasury for more money, the Minister should take the decisive executive, political decision to restructure SANDF into a smaller, more streamlined and modern force that will have less personnel that will be better equipped to deal with South Africa’s defense requirements. SANDF members should be better trained and armed, with full modern technological capabilities to monitor our borders 24/7 and that will enable all spheres of the defence force to take decisive action at a moment’s notice against any possible threat. It is also high time President Cyril Ramaphosa, as commander-in-chief of South Africa’s defence forces, stepped in to solve this escalating situation. Left in the hand of Minister Mapisa-Nqakula, the defence forces will continue its decline and will eventually leave the country completely defenseless. What is happening to SANDF is a complete travesty and an insult to the brave men and women who put their lives on the line to protect our country. A smaller, better trained defence force would not only benefit South Africa, but the whole region who often looks to us for guidance and leadership. The DA will be going on an oversight visit to the Mozambican and Zimbabwean borders over the weekend to see the problems facing border control for ourselves. Issued by Kobus Marais, DA Shadow Minister of Defence, 26 November 2020 