Minister Bheki Cele calls for greater compliance with Coronavirus Covid-19 level 3 regulations 14 June 2020 Minister of Police General Bheki Cele led a multidisciplinary operation in Soweto, to assess adherence to Covid-19 regulations during the Level 3 Lockdown period. The operation was one of seven activities carried out across the Gauteng province on Saturday 13 June 2020, consisting of members of the South African Police Service, supported by the JMPD and SANDF. Cele praised compliance in some areas in the township. However warned that some residents are still not taking social distancing seriously. “There is also still an issue of non compliance when it comes to the movement of alcohol, the law says you must drink alcohol at home and not in groups, the non- gathering regulation still exists.” The operations saw police seize alcohol that was consumed in public spaces as well as illegally sold cigarettes. Scores are of people were arrested for contravening Regulations of the Disaster Management Act. While conducting operations, Cele announced that 14 police officers have died from Covid-19. The number of infected members has risen to 1685. “ The Western Cape has 1134 positive cases followed by the Eastern Cape and Kwa- Zulu Natal. Over six hundred of the officers have recovered from this virus and are back to serving our communities.” Minister Cele also took the opportunity to condemn the heinous killing of women and children in the country. “I’m pleased that police have made arrests in the case where a young women was found murdered and dumped in a veld in Doornkop, that person will appear in court on Monday. “ Cele also added that police are tracking down a suspect in connection with the murder of 28 year old Tshegofatso Pule. “Gender based violence is a societal issue that needs law enforcement and arms of justice to work hand in hand with civic organisations and formations to confront this monster head on,” Cele concluded. Issued by Lirandzu Themba, Police Ministry Spokesperson, 14 June 2020  