Taxpayers must no longer foot the bill for narcissistic MEC Maile’s ego boosts 11 June 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) has reliably learned that Gauteng MEC for Cooperative Governance, Lebogang Maile, will attempt to yet again appeal the North Gauteng High Court ruling which lambasted the Gauteng Provincial Government for wrongfully placing the City of Tshwane under administration. Today, the court dismissed the Gauteng Government's appeal against the ruling that was made on 26 April 2020, by a full bench, and indicated that the decision of the court is binding and that its ruling stands. This means that the Administrators appointed by the provincial government are no longer in charge in Tshwane and that elected councillors are to be reinstated. For far too long has MEC Maile, a self-evident constitutional delinquent, played roulette with the lives of the residents of Tshwane. His and the ANC’s first attempt to steal Tshwane soon came undone when it was clear that he had received poor legal advice and misunderstood the separation of powers between the three spheres of government. To stomp his authority, he then illegally attempted to discipline the Speaker of Tshwane, Katlego Mathebe, in another fool-hardy and poorly advised legal threat. Again, this came to naught as he over-reached the powers of his office. The placing of the city under administration, aided and abetted by the infamous Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma, was torn apart by the Judiciary who confirmed what the DA had been saying all along - that this decision was illegal. Now, despite legal advice and scorn from the Judiciary, MEC Maile is happy to waste even more public money by undertaking an exercise in futility. The persistent attempts to undermine our democracy and rebuke the findings of the Judiciary must now end. If MEC Maile is to appeal this ruling, the DA will ensure that the costs which will be incurred are paid by the MEC in his personal capacity. As we fight against Covid-19, public funds are in short supply and high demand. Money wasted on the MEC’s attempt at an ANC Tshwane coup would be put to better use in assisting residents who need government to better spend this money now more than ever. The DA have tabled a motion of no confidence in MEC Maile and will urge the Gauteng Provincial Legislature to fast track this motion as it is high time public funds are no longer squandered on Maile’s personal vanity project. Issued by Solly Msimanga,Leader of the Official Opposition in Gauteng, 11 June 2020