EFF statement on the non-existent ANCYL’s attack on Malema 9 June 2020 The EFF SC is shocked at a statement supposedly coming from the ANCYL attacking CIC Julius Malema. Most worrying, the statement is in the name of Gogo Thandi Mahambehlala, who unashamedly claims to speak for young people. Society must dismiss this statement as a hoax and see Mahambehlala as a parody voice of the youth. She must be dismissed as a fake youth. She is not a young lion, but an old hyena masquerading as a lioness. In fact, over 15 years ago, when she was a secretary of the ANCYL in Western Cape, her PEC was disbanded as they could not launch structures on the ground. She is a failed YL leader and only in politics for careerism. The entire ANC collective, together with its alliance partners have been presiding over an economic and social systems that hates black people. Under the ANC, AndriesTatane, Marikana workers, Collins Khosa and many others were brutally killed by police and the military. We unequivocally reiterate that the ANC has no moral ground and political legitimacy to support the Black Lives Matter movement. Such a movement is essentially against the ANC which always takes the side of the white supremacist and white monopoly industries against defenseless black workers. It is the ANC police that arrested student activists in Fees Must Fall movements for fighting for free quality decolonized education. It is the ANC police that daily sends red ants to forcefully remove landless people from white owned properties. Such an organization will never qualify to say it cares for black lives: the ANC is part of the oppression of black lives. Even as the Black Lives Matter protests spread across the USA following the death of George Floyd, the ANC chose to be neutral. Its statement called on black people to be calm in the face of naked police brutality: because the ANC has become a bunch of sellout bastards willing to sacrifice black lives every day for immediate interests of white people. The CIC Julius Malema is therefore correct that Ramaphosa is a bastard: meaning he is a dispensable sellout who collaborated with white monopoly capital in calling for the killing of workers in Marikana. He is not different to all the Bantustan leaders who were willing to kill black people in favor of their narrow political and business interests. Even in the fight against Covid-19 ANC chose the interests of white monopoly profits above those of saving black lives. They are a morally degenerate organization which the whole world must isolate until they fall out of power in South Africa. Issued by Xola Mehlomakulu, National Spokesperson and Media and Comunication, EFF Student Command, 9 June 2020 