SADTU and COSATU Public Service unions take the fight for salary increases to arbitration and is outraged by the senseless killing of women and vandalizing of schools during Lockdown 18 June 2020 SADTU, together with COSATU public service unions POPCRU, DENOSA PAWUSA, SAEPU and SAMA are taking the fight for salary increases of public servants to the next level. The dispute on the non-implementation of PSCBC Resolution 1 of 2018 – Agreement on the Salary Adjustment and Improvements of Conditions of Service for the period 1 April 2020 to 31 March 2021 is proceeding to arbitration. The arbitration is set down for 22 June 2020. This follows the failure of the conciliation process to resolve the matter last month. During the conciliation process on 4 May 2020, the employer presented a down variation of the Resolution proposing that employees receive an annuity without changing the notches and that the money for such be the R10bn which was reserved for pay progression. This meant that employees would not receive pay progression for one year and would only receive a monthly cash payment which would not change the notches. This was rejected by the Unions. SADTU notes that there is a parallel court case by PSA and others in which our Union and all the COSATU unions are cited as respondents and this case is part of the fight for the implementation of the resolution. It is important to note that this is procedural because we have an interest in the matter. There is no requirement from our Union to respond to the court case as stated in the court papers. All the unions are fighting for the implementation of the resolution. Racism, violence against women and wanton theft and vandalism of schools SADTU stands in solidarity with the #BLACKLIVESMATTER campaign in order to end systemic racism as a pandemic. SADTU is outraged and appalled by the senseless killing of women in our country. Education has role in fighting #GBV during the ongoing COVID19 pandemic. The “I am a School Fan” campaign by SADTU is a clarion call for the protection of our schools from vandalism, arson and theft because education is an enabler. The stealing of the future of our children through the criminal activities targeted at our students must fought with everything we have as individuals and as a collective. Stay safe and observe all the COVID19 health precautions at all material times. Let’s fight against the virus in unison. Issued by SADTU Secretariat, 18 June 2020