Covid-19: MEC Mshengu must explain why DoE paid exorbitant PPE prices - only to have it ‘disappear’ 3 June 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) has established during a recent KwaZulu-Natal Education portfolio committee that the province’s Department of Education (DoE) spent just over R422 million on the procurement of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and related material for returning learners in Grades 7 and 12 - at massively inflated prices (view here). While all items meet the required standards (as per Treasury Instruction 5), Infrared thermometers - available at between R800 and R1 000 on the open market - were purchased at a cost of more than R2 500 each. Hand sanitiser, available at wholesale prices ranging from R45 to R65 per litre, was purchased by the Department at R183 per litre. Cloth masks, available for as little as R10 each, were also purchased by the DoE at a cost of R25 each. Meanwhile, 16L spray bottles – normally available at a cost of around R400 were purchased for R1 800 each – a mark-up of more than 400%. To make matters worse, during oversight inspections at KZN schools last week, the DA found evidence of thermometers which could not be used. This after the DoE did not supply batteries. Then there are the more recent social media posts by educators of very poor quality departmental issue cloth masks. When the DA questioned DoE Head of Department Dr EV Nzama and his officials about the inflated prices paid, they tried to hide behind the Treasury Instruction, which provides standard and maximum prices that should be paid. Clearly the DoE chose to pay the maximum prices. The HOD and his officials also told the DA that there were only a set number of companies who could supply their Department and who first had to be vetted by KZN’s Health Department. They then went on to tell us that procurement was from companies based on the ANC’s Radical Economic Transformation programme. A recording of the portfolio committee meeting, which is publicly available, highlights many members’ concerns around the "get rich quick" type of scheme that is being encouraged through this procurement model. Not only is the DA deeply concerned by the DoE’s decision to pay such exorbitant prices, we are equally alarmed by reports that many items simply disappeared en-route to schools. This while MEC KwaziMshengu expresses “shock” – as though their disappearance is the result of some magic trick. This is no time for the MEC to be in a state of shock. Instead, he must explain to both the DA and the people of KZN why this happened and also divulge measures in place to securely deliver this precious cargo and to safeguard them once they arrived. The DA’s assessment of schools during last weeks’ inspections showed this last point is lacking, something that must be rectified without delay. There is clearly a criminal element to the disappearance of this equipment and SAPS must also be brought in to investigate. More of this possible theft will have devastating effects for our children, their teachers and staff. The DA reiterates the call that education must be put back in the hands of parents and schools and that only schools that are safe must be allowed to open. Issued byImran Keeka,DA KZN Spokesperson on Education, 3 June 2020