DA requests urgent review of IPID and SANDF investigations into Collins Khosa’s murder 10 June 2020 Note to Editors: Please find an attached soundbite by Andrew Whitfield, DA Shadow Minister of Police. The Democratic Alliance (DA) has noted the report on the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (IPID) investigation of the events that led to the death of Collins Khosa outside his home in Alexandra on Good Friday. Based on the glaring contradictions between the IPID report and the internal investigation by the South African National Defense Force (SANDF)'s board of inquiry the DA has requested an urgent meeting of the Joint Standing Committee on Police and Defence to review both reports. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0']));The Minister of Defence and Military Veterans, NosiviweMapisa-Nqakula, must explain to the joint committee why SANDF’s investigation into the matter differs so wildly from what IPID has found. The two reports could not be more different. While the IPID investigation recommends that the five metro police officers that stood and watched as SANDF members allegedly brutally attacked Khosa should face disciplinary action, the SANDF report absolved the soldiers of any wrongdoing. IPID’s report has simply brought to light what SANDF has tried so hard to cover up. The violent actions of the soldiers led to Khosa’s death in front of his family and neighbours. No remorse was ever shown. Not on that night when those soldiers entered his house without cause and started attacking him, not when they and members of the metro police intimidated witnesses and confiscated footage of the heinous actions, not when they watched him die. And not since. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));The IPID report has exposed the fact that the SANDF has done nothing but try and cover their tracks. Neither the Minister and her Department, nor the Defense Force and its members have been forthcoming with truth. These soldiers are facing no repercussions and are shown that they are above the law. The police and the army are supposed to serve and protect citizens. They have failed to do that for Collins Khosa and his family. They have failed countless other South Africans. And they will continue to fail, because their superiors would rather save face than discipline them for their disgraceful actions. It is now time that Minister NosiviweMapisa-Nqakula accounts to Parliament and that these reports are urgently reviewed. Issued by Andrew Whitfield and Kobus Marais, DA, 10 June 2020eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_4',115,'0','0']));