Why the US Peace Plan Secures Sovereignty for Israelis and Palestinians 30 June 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[468,60],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_2',112,'0','0']));In recent weeks, international audiences have been fed an unhealthy diet of misleading, factually false, and even propagandistic news and commentary on the U.S. administration’s Mid-East peace plan. Facts and context are sorely needed. First let’s place the peace plan in context. The U.S. Peace to Prosperity plan, learning from the mistakes of six past peace plans, addresses the Palestinian Israeli conflict in a regional context. The US Administration learned over its two year listening tour of the region, that economic instability and, in parallel the Iranian regime’s continued regional subversion constitute the primary threats to the Middle East region. The Palestinian Israeli conflict and its solution are pieces of that puzzle. The US Plan offers a security and economic framework for Israelis, Palestinians, and neighboring Arab states eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));Let’s clarify the facts. In the context of the US Peace plan. Israel has declared its intention starting July 1, 2020, to replace military law with civilian law in some 30 percent of the disputed territories that lie east of the 1949 armistice lines, including the strategically vital Jordan Rift Valley. In these territories where Israeli civilian law may be applied, 500,000 Jews and 25,000 Palestinians live. Contrary to misleading media reports, Israel does not intend to “ Annex the West Bank nor areas with large Palestinian populations. Let’s be clear; 98.5% of all Palestinians live in areas already ceded to the Palestinian pre-state authority by international agreement, Now, Israel with American support, wants to ensure that some 500,000 Israelis East of the 1949 armistice lines will live under Israeli civilian law not military law, nor residual British and Ottoman law. Both Jewish and Arab residents of those areas to which Israel may apply its civilian law will benefit. There is historical precedent.  Israel applied Israeli civilian law to the existentially critical Golan Heights in 1981 and prior to that to the strategically vital eastern part of Jerusalem in 1967. Today’s Israeli Arab citizens and residents in those areas will attest to their quality of life, democracy and freedoms under Israeli law versus the status quo ante under previous Syrian and Jordanian law respectively. eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));This U.S. plan that grants Palestinians and Israelis rights and responsibilities and provides a blueprint to solve the conflict. Let’s make an important definitional correction. Israel is not annexing anything.  States that illegally conquer other states’ sovereign territory-Russia’s annexation of Crimea, Turkey’s annexation of Northern Cyprus- are examples of unilateral annexation. Israel is applying civilian law to non-sovereign territories, particularly the existentially critical Jordan Rift Valley that it has controlled by international agreement since 1993. The current U.S. plan is the first viable blueprint for peace that provides the Palestinians the prospect of becoming the first Arab Middle East “Start Up Nation” without threatening the security of Israel, its Jewish majority “Start Up Nation” neighbor next door. The Palestinian Authority’s record has not inspired confidence in its peaceful intentions. The PA assigned several hundred million dollars of its 2019 budget for a terror incentive program financing pensions for incarcerated terrorists or those killed while carrying out terror assaults and their families. eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_5',115,'0','0']));eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_6',115,'0','1']));The Palestinian leadership and affiliated NGOs in Ramallah have actively co-lead the international economic and political warfare campaign against Israel known as the global BDS movement. South Africans may remember that the Palestinian driven global BDS crusade was launched and led by Yasser Arafat and the Palestinian Authority leadership at the UN sanctioned Durban World Conference Against Racism in 2001. The BDS demonization of the Jewish state at Durban called for a “policy of complete and total isolation of Israel as an apartheid state… and the full cessation of all links between all states and Israel.... and its perpetration of its racist crimes against humanity including ethnic cleansing and acts of genocide.” Today, the PA leadership, and Palestinian schoolbooks and official media have continued to demonize Israel and Jews, including accusing the Jewish State of blood libels. Most recently, in March 2020,  PA Prime Minister Mohammed Shtayyeh accused Israeli soldiers of purposely infecting Palestinians with the coronavirus. This behavior has reminded Israelis to secure themselves first and make concessions second. The current US plan has also preempted the PA’s past strategy of vetoing far reaching Israeli territorial offers for yet a better one. The PA rejected the past six U.S. mediated offers to end the conflict. Former Israeli PM Ehud Barak offered 92 percent of the West Bank at Camp David in 2000, with additional land swaps and Ehud Olmert offered to concede 94% at Annapolis in 2008, with swaps. The PA vetoed each one, including Israel’s vital security requirements, waiting for a better deal. Israelis have become wary of Palestinian leadership’s intentions. This U.S. plan reverses this failed peace paradigm. It begins with recognizing Israel’s vital security needs to risk the establishment of a potentially hostile PLO or Hamas controlled, Palestinian |state> Second it affirms the international legal basis of   , Jewish legal and diplomatic rights. eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-banner-1','ezslot_4',116,'0','0']));In the framework of the U.S. plan, Israel has said it may apply Israeli civilian law in the 50 percent of Area C which Israel has controlled by agreement under the Oslo accords that the Palestine Liberation Organization and the State of Israel first signed in 1993. Under that power sharing agreement, Israel has already conceded to the Palestinian Authority either full or functional control of 40 percent  (Areas A and B of the West Bank where more than 98% of Palestinians live) and 100 percent of Gaza. What remains to be shared under the U.S. plan  is 60 percent of the West Bank, referred to as historic Judea and Samaria for Israelis, of which Israel has agreed in principle to concede an additional 50 percent plus Gaza and lands swaps  from the Western Negev. This latest territorial package paves the way for a viable and potentially prosperous 50 billion dollar start-up Palestinian nation. This is a high risk venture for Israel. Neighboring failed states such as Syria, Lebanon, Iraq, and the Hamas dominated Gaza Strip have effectively been kidnapped and controlled by the Iranian regime. So how does Israel secure itself while being called upon to make room for atwenty-third Arab state that risks becoming another Iranian regime controlled terror proxy? Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu’s calls to apply Israeli law to the Jordan Valley as a first step. The vast majority of Israelis agree that the Jordan Valley and its protective hilltops constitute Israel’s natural security barrier. The Netanyahu-Gantz unity government also agrees. They have has merely operationalized the Oslo accords “security-first” peace vision laid out by former Prime Minister Yitzchak Rabin based on the non-negotiable territorial demand of every Israeli Prime Minister since 1967 of retaining or applying sovereignty to the Jordan Valley. Observers will remember that Rabin declared to the full Knesset assembly on the eve of the signing of Oslo interim accords in October 1995, that, “Israel’s security border will be located in Jordan valley in the broadest sense of that term.” Rabin’s former commander Gen. Yigal Allon, who would become Rabin’s Foreign Minister, had called for Israeli sovereignty to be applied to the entire Jordan Rift Valley following the 1967 war after Israel barely short-circuited an Egyptian-Syrian Jordanian planned invasion. Readers may remember that scores of Jordanian tanks crossed the West Bank westward in a fierce tank battle opposite Israeli forces with the intention of annihilating the territorially indefensible Jewish State. Therefore Netanyahu’s intention in the U.S. peace framework to apply Israeli law from the outset to the Jordan Rift Valley, and its 4500 foot high hill ridge that dominates Israel’s coastal cities and protects Ben Gurion airport from rocket terror attacks,, reflects Israel’s need to survive in a an unstable and dangerous Middle East. The Palestinian leadership had rejected these ironclad security needs in previous peace blueprints. The U.S. plan also formally recognizes Israel’s legal rights to live and build east of the 1967 lines. This is an affirmation of what the 51 principal powers of the League of Nations, the legal predecessor to the United Nations, had formally recognized and affirmed a century ago, of the right of the Jewish people to reconstitute their national home in the geographical area of Palestine. This affirms Israel’s modern legal rights to what has been historically Jewish territory for the past two thousand years. The U.S. State Department’s international jurists have refuted the former Carter administration’s position on Jewish housing in Judea and Samaria, thus reaffirming what every Israeli government since 1948 has understood to be Israel’s legal and diplomatic rights. In sum, the U.S. security-first peace plan paves the way for a secure viable Palestinian state without threatening Israel on approximately 70 percent of the West Bank with a 50 billion dollar state development budget promised by the Arab states and the West. The PA started out on the wrong foot by boycotting the U.S. administration, Israel, and the Arab states participating in the U.S. Peace to Prosperity’s Bahrain economic workshop in May 2019. It’s still not too late for Mahmoud Abbas and the Palestinian Authority leadership to learn from past mistakes and pave the way for a secure, peaceful and prosperous Palestinian future living next to an Israeli neighbor willing to help them achieve it. Dan Diker is a Foreign Policy research fellow at the Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs.