EFF STATEMENT ON THE RESUMPTION OF ALCOHOL SALES Monday, 01 June 2020 The Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) urges all South Africans to be mindful of the dangers that are inherent with alcohol consumption and the collapse that alcohol will cause to our already dilapidated healthcare system and subsequently weaken the war against the spread of COVID-19. South Africa has an ailing healthcare system that has not only been failing to give adequate healthcare to our people but has been unable to operate for more than 12-hours a day during the time before the pandemic came to our nation. The EFF reiterates its position on the ban of the sale of alcohol has and maintains that the resumption of the sale of alcohol amid a pandemic, the rising infection rate and the increasing death toll, is profit-driven and does not consider the sanctity of human life. The impact of alcohol abuse reaches far beyond economic costs; instead, the negative economic consequences of alcohol consumption affect the material welfare of society as a whole. To sell alcohol which is a proven factor in social disobedience and disorder would put a strain on law enforcement agencies, health care infrastructure and negatively impact the health of consumers as alcohol diminishes the strength of one's immune system. We have had numerous reports that confirm, with empirical evidence, the fact that the alcohol ban has had the most significant benefit for social stability and the distribution of the scarce medical resources. Only a month into the Level-5 National Lockdown and Groote Schuur Hospital had reported an unprecedented decrease of trauma cases. The Hospital had recorded a 66% decrease in trauma cases on the weekend to the weekend basis which the trauma unit head, Professor Andrew Nicol, has attributed to the ban of alcohol. Aside for the reduction of trauma cases in the Hospitals, crime statistics reveal that the prohibition of alcohol has also brought about a decrease in murder cases, rape, attempted murder, an assault that cause grievous bodily harm and robbery with aggravating circumstances. The reduced overall violence as reported by crime statistics goes hand in hand with reductions in violent deaths since the COVID-19 lockdown and alcohol sales ban. We call on the President of South Africa and the government to heed to scientific and empirical evidence and not be forced by the white monopoly capitalists to consider the economy over the lives of the people of South Africa. We will hold Cyril Ramaphosa personally responsible for the inevitable burden that will be placed on the health care system and law enforcement agencies. We will hold Ramaphosa accountable for the death of people due to trauma units filled with cases of alcohol inspired conflicts and we will hold him responsible for the general disorder which will result in the spread of the Coronavirus. We will oppose the decisions of a government that has abandoned its responsibility to protect the nation because we cannot be accomplices in the deliberate genocide orchestrated by the capitalists. Statement issued by the EFF, 1 June 2020 Update: EFF STATEMENT ON THE REPORTS OF ALCOHOL RELATED INCIDENTS Tuesday, 02 June 2020 The Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) notes the disquieting reports that have emerged today since the beginning of Level 3 of the National Lockdown that was instituted to curb the spread of COVID-19. The CEO of Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital has reported that in the last 24 hours patients in their trauma units doubled. Majority of these patients were drunk, with stab wounds, and some were involved in accidents. South Africa's healthcare system is already overburdened; hospitals are overcrowded with a shortage of medical resources and dilapidated infrastructure. As such, should the government continue to permit the sale of alcohol, then they will be condemning South Africans and all her people to untimely deaths. The National Lockdown regulations that prohibited the sale of alcohol and tobacco products gave us an opportunity to imagine a different reality across various spheres of our nation and, should we continue on this trajectory. we will have undone all the efforts of the past three months. We call on President Cyril Ramaphosa to reverse the decision to resume the sale of alcohol. Statement issued by the EFF, 2 June 2020 