R2K Statement: Stop the victimization of journalists! 10 June 2020 In July 2019, Independent Media journalist, Sihle Mavuso, was assaulted and apprehended while covering the protests against the former eThekwini Executive Mayor, Zandile Gumede. On 11 June 2020, under the cover of the COVID19 lockdown restrictions, he has to appear in court, criminally charged for doing his job. The Right2Know Campaign notes with great concern that the NPA has gone forward to prosecute this journalist for covering the protest, while the metro police officers against whom charges of intimidation, assault and wrongful arrest were brought, remain at large, those charges are not even investigated. R2K is concerned about the culture of impunity that applies to our security forces. Recently, we have seen the SANDF exonerating its officers for the murder of a civilian Collins Khosa, allegedly for breaking lockdown regulations. Indeed of the 11 people who have been killed at the hands of various security forces during the 2 months of the lockdown, not a single officer has even been taken off active duty, let alone been held accountable for their actions. We are especially troubled when the security apparatus turns its attention to journalists through threats, intimidation and even physical violence. These behaviours have no place in an open and healthy democracy. Journalists play a crucial role in the realization of freedom of expression, information dissemination and in speaking truth to power. They have especially been an important channel for exposing how our security apparatus - including metro police, SAPS and even the SSA and SANDF - have been repurposed to protect individuals for political and sometimes economic reasons. We encourage all defenders of freedom of expression, all defenders of truth, all defenders of human rights to draw attention to these court proceedings and to demand #JusticeForSihle. Let us stand up against violence on journalists. Issued by Busi Mtabane, Right2Know Communicator, 10 June 2020