Gauteng Premier David Makhura blows hot air while the public purse is emptied by party cronies 3 August 2020 Gauteng Premier, David Makhura must release the details of the Special Investigative Unit (SIU) probes into alleged corruption and malfeasance in the Gauteng Provincial Government as a matter of urgency. Last week, Gauteng Health MEC, Bandile Masuku was placed on special leave by the Premier due to his alleged links with President Cyril Ramaphosa’s spokesperson, KhuselaDiko whose husband, Chief MadzikanellThandisizweDiko – the owner of Royal Bhaca Projects, benefitted from a Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) tender issued by the Gauteng Department of Health. During his six year tenure as Premier of South Africa’s wealthiest province, Makhura has been vocal about corruption and the negative impact it has had on service delivery in the province, yet year on year, millions of Rands of public money is lost to corruption. All Makhura’s grand pronouncements have come to naught as the conviction rate for criminals is virtually non-existent. Premier Makhura is no stranger to controversy in his administration. He managed to absolve himself of all wrongdoing in the Life Esidimeni scandal which needlessly claimed the lives of hundreds of mentally ill patients under his watch. His latest performance for the media is yet another hollow attempt to persuade the public that he will act. The DA knows he will not because all he has done to fight the war on corruption is huff and puff and dodge accountability. Too many well-connected cadres of the ANC are linked to corruption for there to be a modicum of justice for those who have been abused by a party that seeks only to serve itself and not the residents of the province. Corruption erodes the fabric of civil society and service delivery. Yet, under the ANC, wanton erosion of public money through nefarious means is the status quo. The Premier must release the details of these SIU investigations to ensure that those who are guilty find themselves adorned in orange overalls, not designer green and yellow party merchandise. Failure to release these documents will leave us with no option but to seek legal recourse for the millions of the provinces residents who have been short-changed by the systemic looting of the public purse. Furthermore, we will also consider tabling a motion of no confidence in the Premier as we cannot sit by and watch the continued pillaging of resources aimed at keeping the already ailing government delivery go unchecked. Tough talk has reached its expiry date. It is now time for decisive action. The DA will ensure that those who have robbed our people of their dignity, their right to quality service delivery and compassionate care are brought to book. Issued bySolly Msimanga, DA Gauteng Caucus Leader, 3 August 2020 