Response by the Premier to article published in Sunday Times  30 August 2020eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0'])); The story published in the Sunday Times today, 30 August 2020, titled, “Northern Cape Premier Zamani Saul under PPE scrutiny – Covid tenders earned R40m for two people close to Premier”, seeks to suggest that I have unduly influenced the awarding of Covid-19 related tenders. I want to mention it upfront that I don’t engage in piggish plunder of public resources. I have great respect for my fiduciary role as the Premier of the Province. The article today reflects poorly on the journalist who wrote it for such a prime newspaper. Sipho Masondo is an award winning senior investigative journalist, to dispense an article so poorly crafted, poorly investigated has left me with a sense of indignation. In the article he embarks on a futile attempt and wild-goose chase to create a link between me and the two people that got the tenders for PPEs. The insinuations in the article are mired in serious untruths and are devoid of any substance. At no point was I involved or tried to influence procurement processes in the Department of Health or the South African Police Services (SAPS) for the benefit of certain individuals. Worse, I do not have any role in the management of the SAPS and how they issue tenders, as SAPS is a national competency. The allegation that comes from an undisclosed source that Somandla Sibisi is my close friend is pure nonsense. I don’t have a close friend called Somandla Sibisi and I challenge anybody with information to the contrary to come to the fore. I relate to him like any other business person in the province, which in most cases I meet at ANC events and State of Province Addresses. I don’t have any business, personal or professional dealings with him. The alleged contract awarded to the wife of my Special Advisor, I picked this matter up on social media platforms. To loosely insinuate that I had any role in the awarding of the tender without a shred of evidence is gutter journalism. I have on various occasions and platforms spoken strongly against corruption. It is therefore very distasteful that a matter as serious as this is used to launch an unwarranted attack on my person and integrity. I was amongst the first Premiers to support the President’s announcement on publicly declaring all PPE procurement. As Chairperson of the Provincial Command Council I have on record called for full disclosure of all procurements, as a result the Northern Cape Government presented a most detailed report on Covid 19 expenditures. This is all due to the fact that there was nothing to hide from my side. It is fair to be subjected to public scrutiny as public servants. But making reckless allegations which are bereft of any substance and not backed by a shred of evidence against individuals will endanger our difficult and rightful course against corruption. In the article the journalist could not provide any evidence on the so called “close relationship” with the Mr Somandla Sibisi and how possibly I could have been involved in alleged issuing of a tender to Mrs Mandisa Shushu. Mr Norman Shushu, the husband to Mrs Shushu, is my personal advisor, but I still don’t understand where I fit in this matter. If the alleged tender was awarded by SAPS in an unlawful manner, the matter must be reported to the law enforcement agencies and the law must take its course. Grasping at straws in an attempt to create a link between myself and the awarding of the tender is actually silly and driven by ulterior motives. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_2',114,'0','0']));Since we started with this 6th Administration we embarked on far-reaching measures to cut on wastage and corruption in the system, as a result we managed to save the Provincial Government close to R200 million in less than a year. I’m quite aware of the fact that there are individuals that are deeply unhappy about these measures and busy with a serious pushback campaign. This attack is just one of those installments of the pushback campaign to soil my reputation. I will not be deterred by this witch-hunt and blackmail, the work to serve the people of Northern Cape honestly and transparently will seamlessly continue. Let me assure the people of the Northern Cape that if there is anything untoward with any of the Covid 19 related tenders issued to the 175 companies there will be serious consequences for all those involved. Issued by Zamani Saul, Premier of Northern Cape, 30 August 2020