Premier Alan Winde on lifestyle audits of Western Cape cabinet members 4 August 2020 When I became Premier last year, I committed to clean and open governance. One of my commitments was lifestyle audits for all members of my cabinet and I am pleased to say that I have received and studied the final report which shows that all members of cabinet and their spouses live a lifestyle in line with their income and that there were no conflicts of interest.eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_3',112,'0','0'])); My commitment was that my cabinet would undergo lifestyle audits at the beginning of the term and again at the end, to ensure that no one is able to use their position on the provincial executive to enrich themselves. These audits, conducted by Nexus Forensic Services, an independent contractor appointed through an open tender process, therefore covered a two year period from June 1 2017 up to 31 May 2019 (when the cabinet was appointed). The audits included Intelligence Searches (BIS) on myself and all members of the cabinet and our spouses or life partners. It also included questionnaires and requested supporting documents for the declarations made on the questionnaires. Finally, Nexus analysed each members’ bank statements.eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0'])); The final report found that all ministers and their spouses led lifestyles commensurate with their income during the two year period and did not pick up any conflicts of interest. They have however advised that the Director General, Harry Malila, should request members of the executive to declare interests in any dormant or non-active business entities, in line with best practice. In the interests of full transparency, the Director General will be doing this. I am pleased by this outcome and that we have been able to complete this process. We may be in the midst of dealing with the COVID-19 pandemic, but we continue to deliver on government services and the commitments I made to the people of this province. In my very first State of the Province Address, I said: "We will live and be held accountable to our values as a government and we will continue to build the capable state on this foundation." I thank my cabinet for submitting themselves to this process, showing their individual commitment to the values of a clean, open and transparent government.eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_4',114,'0','0'])); Text of attached document: NEXUS EXECUTIVE SUMMARYeval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_0',115,'0','0'])); LIFESTYLE AUDITS – WESTERN CAPE GOVERNMENT MEMBERS OF EXECUTIVE COUNCIL AND THEIR SPOUSES 12 JUNE 2020 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY OF FINDINGS 1.1. The Department of the Premier (DoP) requested Nexus Forensics Services (Nexus) to conduct comprehensive lifestyle audits and analysis of business interests of the 11 Members of the Executive Council (Cabinet) and their spouses’ / life partners for the period 01 June 2017 to 31 May 2019 (two years). 1.2. We conducted the investigation and requested information from the Cabinet members. We interrogated the information received and posed clarifying questions to the respective Ministers, where needed. 1.3. The below heat map provides a short explanation of our findings depicted in colour. We reflect the relevant colour after each individual. Heat Map Colour Description RED We identified an area(s) of concern AMBER We identified an area that needs clarification GREEN We did not identify any suspicious transactions or areas of concern that could have an influence on the ability to hold office. 1.4. We conducted Business Intelligence Searches (BIS) on all identified individuals. We distributed questionnaires and requested supporting documents for the declarations made on the questionnaires. We further analysed their bank statements and asked clarifying questions related to unknown deposits. 1.5. We include herewith a short summary of all the conclusions and recommendations made per Member and Spouse/Life partner. High-level summary of conclusions and recommendations Name and Surname Conclusion Recommendation   Premier Alan Winde The Premier’s lifestyle commensuratewith his income.We did not identify any potential conflict of interest. No recommendation GREEN  Tracy Winde Ms Winde’s lifestyle commensuratewith her income.We did not identify any potential conflict of interest. No recommendation GREEN  MEC Anton Bredell MEC Bredell’s lifestyle commensuratewith his income.We did not identify any potential conflict of interest. No recommendation GREEN  Gertrude Bredell Ms Bredell does not earn a salary.We did not identify any potential conflict of interest. No recommendation GREEN  MEC Sharna Fernandez MEC Fernandez’s lifestyle commensurate with her income.We did not identify any potentialconflict of interest. No recommendation GREEN MEC Albert Fritz MEC Fritz’s lifestyle commensuratewith his income.We did not identify any potential conflict of interest. No recommendation GREEN Diane Fritz Ms Fritz is a pensioner and her lifestyle commensurate with her income.We did not identify any potentialconflict of interest. No recommendation GREEN MEC Bonginkosi Madikizela MEC Madikizela’s lifestyle commensurate with his income.We did not identify any potential conflict of interest. No recommendation GREEN MEC Anroux Marais MEC Marais’ lifestyle commensuratewith her income.We did not identify any potential conflict of interest. No recommendation GREEN Erik Marais Mr Marais’ lifestyle commensuratewith his income.We did not identify any potential conflict of interest. No recommendation GREEN MEC David Maynier MEC Maynier’s lifestyle commensurate with his income.We did not identify any potentialconflict of interest. No recommendation GREEN Bronwen Maynier Ms Maynier’s lifestyle commensuratewith her income.We did not identify any potential conflict of interest. No recommendation GREEN MEC Nomafrench Mbombo MEC Mbombo’s lifestyle commensurate with her income.We did not identify any potentialconflict of interest. No recommendation GREEN MEC Ivan Meyer MEC Meyer’s lifestyle commensuratewith his income.We did not identify any potential conflict of interest. No recommendation GREEN Faeza Meyer Ms Meyer’s lifestyle commensurate with her income received from MEC Meyer.We did not identify any potentialconflict of interest. No recommendation GREEN  MEC Deborah Schäfer MEC Schäfer’s lifestyle commensurate with her income.We did not identify any potentialconflict of interest. No recommendation GREEN  Mark Schäfer Mr Schäfer’s lifestyle commensuratewith his income.We did not identify any potential conflict of interest. No recommendation GREEN  MEC Tertius Simmers MEC Simmers’ lifestyle commensurate with his income.We did not identify any potentialconflict of interest. No recommendation GREEN  Monique Simmers Ms Simmers’ lifestyle commensuratewith her income.We did not identify any potential conflict of interest. No recommendation GREEN  ENDS Issued by Western Cape Office of the Premier, 4 August 2020