No subcontracting payment system in place for the GPT  13 August 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) is deeply concerned that the Gauteng Provincial Treasury (GPT) and the Department of Sports, Arts, Culture and Recreation has no concrete plan in place to track the payment of sub-contractors who are working on the construction of the Akasia Library in Tshwane. This information was revealed to me in a written reply by the MEC for Sports, Arts, Culture and Recreation, Mbali Hlophe to my questions tabled in the Gauteng Provincial Legislature. According to the MEC, the construction of the Akasia Library began in the 2017/2018 financial year and the department only has a responsibility to ensure timeous payment to the main contractor. During a Finance Portfolio Committee, the DA raised the concern that there was irregular or non-payment of sub-contractors by main contractors. At this committee meeting where the 4th quarter performance report for the 2018/2019 financial year was deliberated, a recommendation was adopted by the meeting that GPT should develop a reporting model by main contractors to ensure that the payment of sub-contractors is regularised and that there is a transfer of skills. While the committee adopted this resolution, it was not included when the report was adopted in the House on 31 July 2019. Furthermore, the DA also suggested that National Treasury should include a best practice standard in the service level agreements between government departments and private service providers where sub-contracting applies. If sub-contractors who are mostly SMMEs are not paid on time it affects their ability to pay their workers on time. It is therefore important that compliance is strictly monitored and those main contractors who are found to not be paying sub-contractors on time should be blacklisted and removed from the central supplier database of government. A sub-contracting model is of critical importance and we call on the MEC Finance Nomantu Nkomo-Ralehoko to give her undivided attention to this to make sure that such a model is developed sooner rather than later. Issued by Adriana Randall, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC For Finance and e-Government, 13 August 2020