Gauteng Health Department dismisses misleading information on beds at Nasrec quarantine/isolation site 8 August 2020 The Gauteng Department of Health (GDoH) would like to set the record straight concerning misleading media reports about the procurement of beds at the Nasrec quarantine/isolation site and field hospital. Contrary to the statement by the Democratic Alliance (DA) this week which is based on the deliberate misinterpretation of a presentation made to the Health Portfolio Committee on 28 July 2020, the department has not spent R13 000 for each bed as displayed by the DA in social media platforms. GDoH has entered into a Service Level Agreement (SLA) with the Johannesburg Expo Centre (NASREC) through the Gauteng Department of Infrastructure and Property Management (GDID) for full on-boarding services. Beds in the quarantine/isolation section of NASREC were not bought by GDoH but form part of this SLA. The picture used in relation to the statement by the DA is misleading. The picture is of a basic quarantine or isolation bed. The facts are as follows: The presentation to the legislature gave an estimate of costs for a funding proposal to the Solidarity Fund. It is not money spend but a proposal for a high-low functional hospital bed. The technical specs for the high-low bed referred to is that it must among others be hydraulically operated, have variable height, be operated by dual sided foot pedals, have adjustable backrest with gas spring assist. It must be fitted with castors with a central castor locking system, have collapsible safety sides, must be of full length to prevent patient from falling off the bed, must be equipped with CPR mechanism, fitted with drip rod, traction pole with pulleys and weights and carry the maximum patient weight of at least 250 kg. Additionally, the functional hospital bed should have bed-side locker; overbed table; bin kick-about; refuse bin etc. The pictures shared by the DA are not high-low functional hospital beds and do not even come close to some of the specifications indicated above. This is despite the fact that the presentation shared with the Health Portfolio Committee, and the public clearly indicates “hospital beds, high low, with mattress and drip rods” As for the update as it relates to additional infrastructure being added to the health system the province through the Gauteng Provincial Command Council gives a weekly update on the progress being made including on field hospitals. See attached the latest report given on Friday, 07 August 2020. Issued by Kwara Kekana, Spokesperson: MEC for Health, 8 August 2020 