DA welcomes Hawks action on SAPS PPE spending spree 23 August 2020 During the lockdown the South African Police Service (SAPS) spent R1.4 billion on personal protective equipment (PPE) and other items related to the Covid-19 pandemic. The Democratic Alliance (DA) can reveal that the SAPS spent a whopping R642 million, or nearly half of the total R1.4 billion, on 100 000 25 liter plastic sanitizer containers. Upon investigation by the DA it was discovered that a 25 liter plastic container filled with sanitizer can be purchased for less than R2 000. It is not yet clear whether the containers ordered by SAPS were purchased empty or filled with sanitizer. In response to my oral question (see here) in Parliament on August 19th the Minister of Police said that all PPE was purchased at a market related price and according to the National Treasury Instruction Price List. The Minister then went on to say that where these suppliers were out of stock SAPS approached suppliers whose pricing was above the National Treasury instruction. The inflated pricing on sanitizer containers of over 300% is likely to be the tip of the iceberg. The DA calls on the Hawks to leave no stone unturned in their efforts to uncover corruption in SAPS. While the Minister was busy confiscating alcohol and cigarettes during lockdown his own department was taking advantage of the disaster declaration. The SAPS are supposed to be beyond reproach and set the example for all South Africans. Every incident of corruption in the SAPS undermines their credibility to uphold and enforce the law. Under the management of the ANC there doesn’t appear to be enough sanitizer in the world to disinfect the SAPS of corruption. Issued by Andrew Whitfield, DA Shadow Minister of Police, 23 August 2020 DA welcomes Hawks action on SAPS PPE spending spree – Andrew Whitfield MP says inflated pricing on sanitizer containers of over 300% is likely to be the tip of the iceberg DA welcomes Hawks action on SAPS PPE spending spree 23 August 2020 During the lockdown the South African Police Service (SAPS) spent R1.4 billion on personal protective equipment (PPE) and other items related to the Covid-19 pandemic. The Democratic Alliance (DA) can reveal that the SAPS spent a whopping R642 million, or nearly half of the total R1.4 billion, on 100 000 25 liter plastic sanitizer containers. Upon investigation by the DA it was discovered that a 25 liter plastic container filled with sanitizer can be purchased for less than R2 000. It is not yet clear whether the containers ordered by SAPS were purchased empty or filled with sanitizer. In response to my oral question (see here) in Parliament on August 19th the Minister of Police said that all PPE was purchased at a market related price and according to the National Treasury Instruction Price List. The Minister then went on to say that where these suppliers were out of stock SAPS approached suppliers whose pricing was above the National Treasury instruction. The inflated pricing on sanitizer containers of over 300% is likely to be the tip of the iceberg. The DA calls on the Hawks to leave no stone unturned in their efforts to uncover corruption in SAPS. While the Minister was busy confiscating alcohol and cigarettes during lockdown his own department was taking advantage of the disaster declaration. The SAPS are supposed to be beyond reproach and set the example for all South Africans. Every incident of corruption in the SAPS undermines their credibility to uphold and enforce the law. Under the management of the ANC there doesn’t appear to be enough sanitizer in the world to disinfect the SAPS of corruption. Issued by Andrew Whitfield, DA Shadow Minister of Police, 23 August 2020