DA appalled by SAFA’s verbal attack on MPs seeking answers over misconduct allegations  18 August 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) is appalled by the verbal attack directed towards the Party today by the South African Football Association (SAFA) while they were presenting their annual financial report and other governance matters to Parliament’s Portfolio Committee on Sport, Arts, and Culture. This was an opportunity for the football association to account for several issues comprising from allegations of misconduct, financial impropriety, and administration interference which resulted in the dismissal of its Deputy President Ms Ria Ledwaba, and its financial mismanagement team. However, much to our disbelief SAFA showed no regard for Parliamentary oversight, and their responses can only be described as hostile towards the DA as they essentially refused to answer questions. It was clear that the SAFA Executive had absolutely no intention to answer any of the DA’s questions, but was only intent at attacking the Party and myself for demanded transparency and accountability for the allegations which have been levelled against them. I received no protection from the Committee Chairperson, Beauty Dlulane, in this regard, despite the fact that SAFA executives continued to make it difficult for the DA to properly and extensively raise questions that will allow us to get to the bottom of problems that are vexing the football body. The DA is disappointed, not only in the Chairperson,  but also ANC members of the Committee, who through their silence defended the kleptocracy and maladministration in the association. We reiterate our call for an investigation into the SAFA President Danny Jordan, and we call for the lifestyle audit to be instituted for him and SAFA’s National Executive Committee because it is clear that they are hiding something. The DA will also ask relevant law enforcement agencies like the Special Investigative Unit (SIU), South African Police Service (SAPS), and Public Protector to investigate the truth about what is happening at SAFA. Jordan cannot continue to be allowed to run this association like his spaza shop, wielding his unfettered political power to advance his own interests. We cannot allow the public to be blinded by the work he did to help bring the 2010 FIFA Soccer World Cup in South Africa, and ignoring the fact that his current actions are destroying SAFA. The DA will not keep quiet, while Parliament’s role as an oversight body is being threatened Issued by Tsepo Mhlongo, DA Shadow Minister of Sports, Arts and Culture, 18 August 2020