The Sport Minister and BLM  – The only sport being played is the race card - 18 August 2020 The Olympic motto Citius, Altius, Fortius is translated from Latinas "Faster, Higher, Stronger."  In South Africa Minister of Sport, Nathi Mthethwa and his ideological cohorts attaches, a different meaning, namely Quotas, Transformation and Social engineering. Minister Nathi Mthethwa who now expects SA Rugby to take a stand against eight South Africans who refused to bow the knee in support of the Black Lives Matter campaign in a rugby match in England this weekend, clearly does not understand the South African constitution. Section 16 of the Constitution guarantees Freedom of Expression to South Africans. Therefore, they can choose to participate in a campaign. The same players all wore ‘Rugby Against Racism’ T-shirts that are in line with the South African ideal of non-racism and to act against racism. However, forcing players to bend the knee in symbolic support of an extremely controversial and politicised Black Lives Matter campaign indicates the minister's ideological coercion and social manipulation. It does not serve the interests of sport at all, but only the short-sighted interests of people fighting for political survival and positioning. In the apartheid years the ANC and its related organisations achieved international sport isolation of South Africa through the slogan "no normal sport in an abnormal society". Now the ANC government want to politicise sport again with its obsession with race. Political interference and state intervention as demonstrated by Minister Mthethwa serve only a short-term political agenda. From a Minister of Sport one expects a constructive contribution to sport and towards everyone involved in the various sporting codes. However, it is becoming apparent from ministers who are in trouble in their portfolio to play the race card. The Minister of Sport's own achievements in the portfolio are limited, and he may only be evaluated for his playing ability - even if it is to only play the race card constantly. This is not a sport! Issued by Jan Bosman, Chief Secretary, Afrikanerbond, 18 August 2020