EFF statement on the Commission for Gender Equality and the National Department of Health’s silence following the deadline to respond to the report on forced sterilization of HIV positive black women 23 August 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[468,60],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_4',112,'0','0']));The Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) demands a public response from the Commission for Gender Equality (CGE) Chairperson, Ms. Tamara Mathebula on whether the National Department of Health (NDOH) has responded to the extended deadline. The NDOH was expected to respond to the CGE's investigative report that women were tortured in public hospitals using forced or coerced sterilization by the 21 August 2020. The investigative report took the CGE 5-years to complete. The tortured women have been denied access to justice for over 12-years by various government departments. We strongly urge the CGE Chairperson and Commissioners to act according to its constitutional mandate as a Chapter 9 institution and do so expediently and decisively. The conduct of the CGE on this torturous act is a signal that its office bearers lack capacity or there is political interference. The CGE is warned that the EFF is closely monitoring activities between its office bearers, Union Buildings and Luthuli House. We will not only expose inappropriate and conniving activities, but we will use all available means to bring the culprits to account. The EFF is publicly registering its concerns that the CGE Chairperson extended the initial deadline without informing the public exactly when the extension was granted and why it was granted. We have noted statements in the report that the CGE experienced hostile reception from staff "who were in most cases, not very co-operative... eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0']));The hostility was from both management and medical personnel." However, the CGE did not open criminal cases against the culprits for obstructing justice. Further, the CGE did not go to court demanding the NDOH hand over required documents. It is unacceptable that a constitutionally mandated institution positions itself as a civil society movement. It is also unacceptable that, through the office of our chief whip, we had to write to the CGE questioning whether the NDOH has responded to the deadline. We have not yet received a response. This is a matter of national importance, and the CGE is required to treat it as such. The CGE must note the position of the EFF. We will not allow the women who were tortured by the ANC government to be subjected to secondary violations by the CGE. If the CGE office bearers are incapable of fulfilling their constitutional mandate, they must remove themselves from office, or they will be removed. The same message applies to the Health Professions Council of South Africa (HPCSA) and the South African Nursing Council (SANC). Both these institutions remain silent on its progress in administrating justice against the implicated health care professionals. It is of no surprise that the NDOH has not bothered to report publicly whether or not they have responded. We note with disgust the silence of Ramaphosa's Gender Base Violence and Femicide (GBVF) Desk and the Department of Women. However. we have long come to expect the undermining, inhumane and disdain manner in which the ANC Government responds to the people it was elected to serve. The EFF will leave no stone unturned in ensuring that the women whose bodies remain unresolved crime scenes at the hands of the ANC government receive justice. Issued by Vuyani Pambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 23 August 2020