DA asks Premier Saul for list of PPE contracts 25 August 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_0',112,'0','0']));The Democratic Alliance (DA) has submitted a formal request to the Northern Cape Premier, Dr Zamani Saul, for a breakdown of all Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) contracts that have been entered into by government institutions in the province. Widespread corruption relating to the awarding of such contracts across the country has been exposed. There have, however, been conflicting reports in the media regarding PPE contracts in the Northern Cape. In fact, one report indicates that the Northern Cape is the only province where the total monetary value of PPE contracts remains unknown, whilst what is apparently known is that at least two of the contracts are under investigation. Meanwhile, another report indicates that there are at least seventeen PPE contracts that have been entered into by provincial government. We cannot go on hearsay when dealing with such a costly matter. Opportunistic vultures have swooped down on the pandemic crisis, seeing how they could best make a quick buck off state funds, while the people of this country are suffering. We have also heard reports of inferior quality PPEs being delivered to health facilities in the province and connected individuals receiving contracts that have not even been advertised. While the DA has made proposals about how to go forward in dealing with Covid-19 contracts, including taking the matter to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts (SCOPA) and setting up a team to scrutinise such contracts, to date our calls have fallen on deaf ears. Given the invitation extended by MEC of Health, MarupingLekwene, at a Covid-19 update meeting with the provincial legislature last week, for us to request a list of PPE contracts directly from the premier, we will most definitely take him up on his offer. This is against the backdrop that the premier has apparently indicated that he is in possession of such a list and that one needs only need ask him for it. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_2',114,'0','0']));It is increasingly important that we take a whole-of-society approach in protecting government funds. We need to push for openness and transparency. Together, we also need to invite public scrutiny if we are to expose the Covidpreneurs and safeguard what is left of the public purse. Issued by Andrew Louw,DA Northern Cape Provincial Leader, 25 August 2020