Jeff Bezos has unprecedented wealth – right? Wrong! John of Gaunt, the fourth son of King Edward the Third, was the richest man in 14th century England. He could give Bezos a run for his money. Gaunt was not unique. Thomas Piketty, in his book Capital in the 21st Century, concedes that inequality is not a recent phenomenon. There has been worse in previous centuries. He states that the revulsion that has arisen in the last few decades is due to rapidly growing inequality in the world post 1980.The First and Second World Wars were great income and wealth levellers. In a sense, therefore, our base is artificially low, as we base our wealth conceptions on the golden age of the 1960s. This does not negate Piketty’s argument for a reversal of the current wealth disparity trend. It merely places the matter in historical context. The best place to start when evaluating disparities are so-called GINI co-efficients. A GINI of zero represents perfect equality, whereas 100 percent would mean that one person has everything. An income GINI measures income inequality; an asset or wealth GINI measures wealth inequality. South Africa (SA) has the world’s highest income GINI of 65%. To place this in context, Brazil, the second highest major country, is at 53%. China – surprisingly - is at a high 45%, and the US at 42%. The EU is lower – in the mid 30’s. In a sense SA’s GINI is artificially high, as it is computed before taking into account tax and free or cheap services, and SA has an exceptionally large transfer component in its economy. Nevertheless, even after any such adjustments, our income GINI would probably still be the world’s highest. It is critical to note that GINI co-efficients just measure relative inequality. They are in no way a measure of absolute poverty. For example, in 2000 SA’s GINI was 58%, while over 40% of the population were below the food poverty line - they did not have enough of the right food for a healthy life. Our GINI has now risen to 65%, but those in dire poverty have fallen to 25% of the population. This is in large part due to the rise in social grants. China is an instructive example: in the late 1970s China’s GINI was a low 30%, while most of its people were extremely poor. Today, China has eradicated dire poverty, but its GINI has risen to between 40 and 45% (the precise level is disputed). From the 1970s China lifted three-quarters of a billion people out of poverty while the GINI was rising. Zimbabwe is another example: its GINI is 44 percent, but income per capita is only one-eighth that of SA. Confusingly, the inequality debate in SA conflates income and wealth. These are not the same. Wealth is the stock of assets (represented by savings and investments) from which income is derived. We consume income. We should never consume wealth: if we did so, we would run down our operating plant, and eventually would have nothing at all. Although not often referred to, wealth GINIs are computed for SA and world- wide. Here, the data reveal an anomaly: although wealth GINIs are quite a lot higher than their income cousins, there is remarkably little disparity across the globe. SA has – at first sight - a most distorted wealth GINI of 80%, but so do the great majority of countries. Our wealth GINI is average and not out of line. Brazil is the same as SA, China is at 85% - and Russia at 90%! There appear to be no studies as to why income disparities vary from 65% to 25%, whereas wealth disparities are in an 80% - 90% range. This would be a fruitful area to research. This is not to say that our wealth inequalities are of no concern: they are, but we are not unusual.eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0'])); The question arises: do we have a reasonable level of taxes on wealth? It would appear so, if we take all forms of wealth tax into account. These are: property rates (my estimate) R 25 billion; capital gains tax R17 billion; transfer duties R 7 billion and estate duty and donations tax of R3 billion. These total over R 50 billion per annum. One can quibble about whether they are all classical wealth taxes, but they do impact heavily on the rich. Surprisingly, estate duty is the smallest, at less than three billion rand, but it is of course only paid once. It must be noted that while our rate of estate duty may seem low at a maximum 25%, many assets in a large estate would also have attracted capital gains tax on death. The same assets are effectively taxed twice. Let us now consider what may happen were we to introduce a much higher tax on death - either as a higher estate duty, or an inheritance tax. The difference is not important.eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_6',115,'0','0'])); The first result would be an acceleration in the brain drain. We must note that many rich countries have abandoned tax on death, including Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Portugal and Sweden. While the US has a high tax rate on death, this only applies to assets in excess of R 80 million. As most of these countries are sought after by South Africans considering emigration, there would be a large increase in wealthy emigrants. This would deprive SA of skills and future tax. Not only are countries moving away from death tax, but they are also abandoning annual wealth taxes. Of the twelve or so countries that had such taxes a generation back, only Spain, Norway, Switzerland and Belgium remain. The rates are typically low - less than one percent - and generate very little revenue. What is likely to happen if we insist on bucking the trend, and are prepared to sacrifice skilled emigrants? If we institute either a drastically increased death tax, or a high annual wealth tax, we can be sure that this will destroy many of our family businesses. Entrepreneurs will tend to extract the maximum cash flow from their enterprises, and either consume this, or send it offshore. Most business owners, crucially including farmers, would be very well off in the short term were they to neglect long term investment and concentrate on extracting profit. They or their children would then, in due course, be in a position to leave the country. Even in the short term, swingeing wealth taxes would hit the ordinary citizen hardest. Either a high tax on death, or high annual wealth taxes would place selling pressure on the JSE, as liquid assets would need to be sold to pay the tax. Bearing in mind that high net worth individuals own a relatively small proportion of listed shares, the downward pressure on share prices would impact most heavily on ordinary employees’ pensions. The value of state and private pension funds would fall. This decline would almost certainly far exceed any wealth tax extracted from the rich. eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-banner-1','ezslot_5',116,'0','0'])); To conclude, any attempt to force equality on our society via high taxes on wealth would backfire spectacularly. Nowhere in the world has this been achieved. The only way to get closer to equality is to grow the economy and skills, and so create employment. The way to do this is via an obsession with education, and good, clean governance. There are no short-cuts. Rather than staring at GINI co-efficients, we should shift our gaze to global disparities. SA comprises 0.7 percent of the global population, but our GDP is only 0.3 percent of global income. If we addressed this through wise policies, and abandoned the desire for the ultimate wealth tax – land expropriation without compensation - we would grow our way out of poverty. Note: The data herein relate to the period before the Covid 19 pandemic. It is likely that the pandemic will exacerbate global and local wealth and income disparities. This will not however detract from the conclusion above.