Sport Minister’s threats concerning taking a knee for BLM are unconstitutional 18 August 2020 The threats by the Minister of Sport, Nathi Mthethwa, aimed at athletes who do not want to take a knee for the Black Lives Matter (BLM) ideology, are unconstitutional and wrong said the FF Plus leader, Dr Pieter Groenewald, today in Parliament during its debate on BLM. The FF Plus feels that the Minister's statements concerning certain rugby players are unacceptable. South Africa's Constitution makes provision for freedom of association and if the Minister thinks that he can force sport participants, or anyone else, to take a knee for BLM, he is in effect subjugating them to Marxism. BLM is nothing but a Marxist movement and every South African has the constitutional right to refuse to kneel for an unacceptable ideology. The FF Plus encourages every person who does not want to take a knee, to instead take a strong stand on the matter and to invoke the Constitution. The founders of the BLM-movement are self-confessed, radical neo-Marxists who have admitted outright that they are determined to destroy Western values and are openly promoting an anti-white campaign. The George Floyd incident in America raises the question why the same fuss was not made about the death of the black man Collins Khosa who was beaten to death by black soldiers in South Africa. Absolutely nothing came of Khosa's death, no fuss and no unrest. Is it possible that the reason for this is that it was an incident of black-on-black violence? The FF Plus is strongly opposed to any form of police brutality and racism. That includes any legislation or institution that uses race as premise. In the FF Plus's view, that makes the legislation or institution racist per se, just like all the laws regarding Affirmative Action (AA) and Black Economic Empowerment (BEE) in South Africa. Young black people in the country consider it an insult to be appointed merely due to Affirmative Action. They say that it makes them feel inferior as they want to be able to compete with others on equal footing. The FF Plus will not kneel before anyone or to promote any movement, the party will only kneel before the Almighty and not for any person or any other reason and, thus, the party rejects the EFF's motion in this regard. Issued by Pieter Groenewald, FF Plus leader, 18 August 2020