Open Letter to President of the Republic of South Africa Mr. Cyril Ramaphosa 14 August 2020 Dear Mr. President, RE: Request for scientific explanation of the baffling government statistics on the COVID-19 pandemic in South Africa The National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa is of the view that the matters we urgently seek clarity on from you are both very urgent, and concern all the people in South Africa, hence the decision to pen an Open Letter. We are baffled, and have found no credible scientific explanation why government statistics on the coronavirus rate of infection and deaths in South Africa show a sudden drastic reduction. We are also not convinced that the deaths announced by government so far are anywhere near the truth. The numbers simply don’t add up Mr President, please explain. As we pen this open letter South African government statistics confirm that South Africa has over 570,000 confirmed cases of infections. The government further confirms that over 11,000 people have succumbed to the virus. We are the fifth most infected country on Earth. The South African Medical Research Council (SAMRC) meanwhile published a report that from May 6 to July 28, more than 28 329 excess deaths had been recorded in South Africa compared to 7 257 government confirmed Covid-19 deaths. SAMRC further reports that trends in all provinces have plateaued or declined during the week ending on 4 August 2018. The number of weekly deaths, however, from natural causes are all significantly higher than predicted, except for Limpopo, which is now below the upper prediction bound. Compared with the predicted number of natural deaths from historical data in the week ending 4 August 2020, Free State had 118% more, Gauteng had 102% more, Eastern Cape had 96% more, KwaZulu-Natal had 69% more, Mpumalanga had 63% more, Northern Cape had 51% more, North West had 38% more, Western Cape had 37% more and Limpopo had 15% more. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_5',114,'0','0']));The Minister of Health Zweli Mkhize has confirmed this, by saying that: "In response to reports on excess deaths, we now require that all sudden deaths and those that occur at home must have specimens taken for Covid-19 before a death certificate is issued." What is further baffling us is how testing has recently dropped from more than 50, 000 tests per day a couple of days ago to just below 12,000 tests by the 11th of August 2020. From these drastically reduced testing numbers, it is inevitable that infected cases must appear to be small. In the Eastern Cape, we are now told that due to limited testing capacity, testing has been pegged at a maximum of 2,500 tests per day from the desired 5,000 tests per day. This is because of critical lack of government capacity to conduct large tests and deliver results on time. Taxis have been allowed to load 100% capacity, schools are re-opening and many workplaces are open. Internal travel within the province is permitted. Restaurants are opening. Malls are essentially operating at full capacity except for the ban on alcohol and tobacco. Churches are free to have direct services as long as they follow COVID-19 safety regulations. All these human activities offer excellent opportunities for super spreading the virus, and as a result all South African provinces and towns now have the virus. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_4',115,'0','0']));Contrary to an ANC NEC statement, the pandemic curve of South Africa has not been flattened. Scientifically, the country has not peaked yet.  Can you kindly explain to us, scientifically, where the government is getting the confidence to start to create the impression that we are winning the fight against the virus? It has been speculated in the media that you may soon announce either a lowering of the Lockdown Level to Level 2, or abandoning the Lockdown all together. If you do this, can you explain in clear scientific detail the basis of government’s decision? You swore an Oath before you became President of the Republic of South Africa, and promised, among other things, to solemnly and sincerely always protect and promote the rights of all South Africans. May we remind you that the most fundamental right of all human rights is the right to life? The decision you and your government have taken to allow taxis to load 100% instead of subsidising the taxi industry so that they can carry safe loads violets the Oath of Office you swore and promised to uphold: the lives of ordinary Black and African workers who, at a rate of 15 million per day use these taxis have been placed, literally, in grave danger by you, Mr. President. The past three months have seen an unprecedented rise of nationwide public anger against this government because of the massive revelations of corruption involving essential COVID-19 health supplies. Archbishop Emeritus Desmond Tutu’s Foundation has gone so far as to predict that this might just see the ANC government fall. Your party, the ANC has acknowledged the shame this has brought upon all of you. In light of all this, combined with the fact that you have failed, lamentably, to protect the wages of the employed, businesses and the lives of the poorest unemployed of our people, except for throwing a miserly R350 covid19 social grant at the poor,  which even this your government has failed to administer properly, we see no reason why you and your government should not lift the ban on alcohol and tobacco sales – because you are incapable and unwilling to protect the lives of the workers who earn a living in these sectors. The sudden and drastic reduction in the numbers tested may both be austerity being applied by the government, and a sign that it has given up on the science of how to beat this virus through testing, isolating, treating, quarantine and contact tracing to reduce and cut infections while simultaneously treating the sick. Please do confirm to us that this is not the new policy that government is adopting on the pandemic. Our view is that with the taxis and schools opening, and the infections firmly rooted now in all working class communities, the ANC government is afraid of the double anger from the masses from corruption and rising infections and deaths. And so you will try hard to paint a false picture - that somehow you are getting on top of the virus, when that is simply impossible, given the situation that government statistics are painting. We are extremely worried and afraid that this false picture may lure the working class into a false sense of security and cause them to relax handwashing and sanitising, masking and social distancing. All this could, combined with the pre-pandemic collapsed public health system, lead to a new and increased spike in infections and deaths. We demand most respectfully but urgently that government immediately cause to be established an independent multidisciplinary task team, to sift through all the data on infections and deaths, to assist the people of this country to take care of themselves and each other. It is impossible to beat the virus with ignorance, bad and false science, and mistruths. We need and urgently must be armed with the scientific truth about the state of the pandemic and its possible course. We firmly believe that if this government has nothing to hide it will have no problem establishing as a matter of urgency, such a task team. We have failed to understand why, in order to protect life, your government has refused to nationalise private health resources so that all the people of South Africa could be given an equal chance to beat the virus. One private medical aid scheme has even boasted that it will fly its clients around until beds and ventilators are found for their clients. You swore to protect ALL South African lives. Why are you allowing others’ lives to have a superior chance of survival over others? Could you kindly explain why, to date, you have not nationalised private hospitals and clinics? Can all provincial governments publish the amounts of money they have spent in private laboratories for tests and for buying beds in private hospitals? We need these figures to compare them with the looting from PPE tenders and to determine who has made the most out of the suffering of the people of South Africa. Finally, Sir, may we request that you find a way, when you speak to the country, to make sure that as you allow capital to make money, you do not create the false impression that your government is winning the war against the virus. This will only serve to let the working class lower their guard against a deadly enemy they are fighting alone. Speak clearly, Sir, about the continuing threat the virus causes to our lives. I remain, Irvin Jim NUMSA General Secretary.