OUTSTANDING UIF TERS PAYMENT FOR BUS PASSENGER SECTOR HAS BEEN PAID 6 August 2020 The National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (NUMSA) can confirm that the outstanding payment of the Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF) Temporary Employee Relief Scheme (TERS) for employees who fall under the South African Road Passenger Bargaining Council (SARPBAC), has been paid to the bargaining council today.eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_0',112,'0','0'])); For the last two days NUMSA has been engaging with the officials at the Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF) over the delayed TERS payment for the bus passenger sector. Workers from PUTCO bus protested outside the offices of the department of Labour in Pretoria yesterday because they had not received any income since the end of April. They protested out of desperation and frustration because they have been forced to survive with no income for the last three months. Following the meeting with our officials the UIF paid the outstanding May TERS money into the SARPBAC bank account this afternoon and tomorrow, we are told that the Bargaining Council will then distribute the monies to more than 400 companies which are affiliated to it. According to the UIF the reason for the delay in the TERS payment is that there is a lot of fraud and corruption by employers and it takes time to double check banking details and prevent fraudulent activity. Whilst we accept that the UIF has a responsibility to ensure that TERS money is not abused, we urge them to find a better way to fast track these processes, and this must be done urgently. It is completely unfair that workers and their families’ have to suffer without any financial relief sometimes for months at a time because they are verifying banking details and information. If the UIF is to be used as a vehicle to disburse these funds to the public, then the verification process needs to drastically improve. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_6',113,'0','0'])); We want to thank our officials who have been working tirelessly to resolve these delays with the department. We will continue to do everything possible to alleviate the suffering of our members during this difficult time of the covid19 pandemic. Aluta continua! The struggle continues! Statement issued by Phakamile Hlubi-Majola, NUMSA National Spokesperson, 7 August 2020