Mayor condemns shooting at law enforcement officers, killing and wounding of children 24 August 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_0',112,'0','0']));The City of Cape Town condemns the shooting of live ammunition at law enforcement officials in the Range area of Elsies River today which has led to the death of one child and injured another. The gunman has the blood of an eight-year-old fatally-wounded boy on his hands. He has also seriously wounded a girl (12). My heart breaks for the families of the children. I am informed officials were acting to protect social housing units from land invasion following many desperate calls for help from the community. Further, that our officers are unharmed having taken cover as shots were fired at them from within a crowd. The individual who fired at officials while carrying out their duties is apparently known in the local community. We call on authorities to ensure there is justice for the heart-breaking loss of an innocent young life today. We are deeply mourning along with the families this evening. We welcome the swift action by the South African Police Service (SAPS) in pursuing a case of murder and attempted murder as a result of today’s shooting. The City is doing everything possible to assist SAPS. We are indebted every day to our law enforcement officials who are putting their bodies on the line to protect public land from illegal invasion and to safeguard the communities affected most by these acts. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_2',114,'0','0']));Over the last month we have seen violent and coordinated land invasions in over 30 different parts of the metro. Almost 50 officers have been injured on duty, and many official vehicles have been damaged. I recently met with the National Police Commissioner to call for more Public Order Policing (POP) support in upholding the Rule of Law in our communities. On Friday 21 August I repeated the urgency of our call in a letter to the Commissioner. We are a growing city and we owe it to future generations to protect public land for service delivery, housing, schools, transport and community facilities. eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_5',115,'0','0']));The City will keep standing up for the overwhelming majority of law abiding residents who suffer the severe consequences of a relatively small group of people who attempt to occupy land illegally. Residents can give anonymous tip offs if they have any information on this shooting. Please call 107 from a landline or 021 480 7700 for emergencies. Issued by Media Office, City of Cape Town, 24 August 2020