MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube welcomes agreement reached by government and retailers on panic buying 20 March 2020 In view of recession and panic buying caused by the outbreak of Coronavirus, we are paying attention to vulnerable members of society – especially those who are food insecure. We are also planning to deepen the informal traders and tuckshops owners in the township and rural areas. On the 16th March, for the first time in this country we saw commodities such as sanitizers and detergents including food disappearing from the shelves as consumers bought goods in bulk in anticipation of shortages that might be caused by lockdowns. We have also been inundated with calls from concerned community members who complained about a sudden increase in prices. We wish to welcome discussions and an agreement reached by the Minister of Trade, Industry and Competition Mr Ebrahim Patel and retailers, especially those who are members of the Consumer Goods Council of South Africa (CGSA). These retailers include Massmart, Pick n Pay, Shoprite, Checkers, Spar and Woolworths. We wish to inform the people of KwaZulu-Natal that following the discussion, which involved the Competition Commissioner and the National Consumer Commissioner, it has been agreed that moving forward, retailers will put up notices in their stores advising customers of purchasing limits to prevent panic buying. The parties have also agreed that suppliers will ensure consistent availability of products. We welcome the fact that both government and retailers have agreed on the measures that include applying customer purchasing limits on in-demand products.  The National Consumer Commission and the Competition Commission will ensure close price monitoring to protect consumers during this period. Critically, we salute retailers for their commitment to maintaining product prices. It is also assuring to learn from CGSA that the “retail value chain in South Africa, from manufacturing to retailers, it is not forecast to impact the consumer goods sector’s ability to continue to provide for consumers’ needs.” eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_0',112,'0','0']));  