DA welcomes declaration of national drought disaster 5 March 2020 Note to Editors: Please find an attached soundbite in Afrikaans and English, by Annette Steyn MPeval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0'])); Following sustained pressure from the Democratic Alliance (DA) the Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (CoGTA), Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma has finally gazetted and declared a national drought disaster. While the DA is pleased by this long-overdue declaration, it is not, however where government’s work stops. The DA reiterates our call for the following interventions: eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0']));The provision of a temporary jobs fund to assist with the paying of wages at some of the worst-hit farms. A temporary jobs fund will not only help prevent further job losses, but it will help free up much-needed funds to provide for livestock feed, water infrastructure, borehole drilling, desilting of dams and covering any replanting costs. The establishment of an inter-departmental task team between the National Treasury, the Departments of Water and Sanitation, CoGTA and Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development to develop a strategy for the completion of big-budget water infrastructure projects. Government’s chronic inability to manage big-budget capital projects has largely exacerbated the drought crisis. Throughout the Northern Cape, Western Cape, Eastern Cape, and Limpopo people have suffered in silence as droughts ravish through their communities. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));In a presentation to Parliament‘s portfolio committee on agriculture, land reform and rural development in October last year, it was revealed that R1.3 billion is needed to contain the effects of the ongoing drought crisis and its impact on the agricultural sector. The declaration of a national drought disaster is, therefore, a welcome decision as it will trigger the release of the much-needed funds to the affected provinces. Rural communities have been hit hard by this drought, and their plight has been met with indifference from the ANC government. Unlike the ANC, in the DA-governed Western Cape, the provincial government released R50 million in additional funding for drought relief in the province. Where we are in opposition in Parliament and provincial legislatures across provinces, we have been relentless in seeking answers and progress that has been made in addressing the drought. We will keep on monitoring the roll out plan in order to ensure best value for money is achieved with drought assistance. Issued by Annette Steyn,DA Shadow Minister of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development, 5 March 2020