Statement by the MEC for Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs – Nomusa Dube-Ncube after workers saved from a factory manufacturing masks receive their salaries. 30 March 2020 Yesterday, I issued a statement regarding the plight of 14 workers who were rescued after I had assigned officials from the department’s Consumer Protection Unit.  The workers had been locked up in a mask manufacturing factory in Umhlanga since Monday last week. I wish to report that the workers have been paid their salaries. At this stage we wish to allow the Department of Employment and Labour to continue with their investigation in relation to the violation of the Conditions of Employment; and Occupational and Safety Act. I have instructed officials from my department to move with speed in processing hundreds of complaints from workers across the province.  Unannounced visits have been planned for this afternoon. It is disturbing to learn about workers who are forced to work in groups of more than 300 in unhygienic conditions. This is despite fact that they are not performing essential services as stipulated by the Department of Trade, Industry and Competition. We have received complaints against companies that are alleged to have issued fraudulent permits to works. On the other hand there are companies that are alleged to have obtained permits after giving false information. Consequently, some workers are forced to work in contravention of the national disaster provisions as announced by the President of the Republic of South Africa His Excellency Cyril Ramaphosa. We have received reports of workers who have been arrested for failing to comply with guidelines outlined by the national government. Once I again I wish reiterate our position as the department. We will never turn a blind eye to these injustices. Critically, Coronavirus poses a major threat to the stability of our economy. We condemn business owners who are exposing the province’s work force to this virus. It is highly commendable for some businesses who have responded positively to government’s call for partnerships during this difficult period. We have also joined forces with the Durban Chamber of Commerce and Industry in order to ensure that we cushion our workers and business from the negative impact of the coronavirus. It is important for the business community to be alive to the reality that the Coronavirus has already placed a strain on the national and provincial fiscus. Workers remain our special resource that we must protect in order to ensure that - post coronavirus period – we revive our economy. Protecting our workforce is critical because absenteeism from the workplace as a result of illnesses related to coronavirus will negatively affect production. This will have harmful effect on economic stability and growth. Lastly, I wish to indicate that later today, in my capacity as the Chair of the Economic Cluster, I will announce interventions that have been packaged by the cluster as directed by the Premier Sihle Zikalala. These interventions are designed to help informal traders, co-operatives, SMMEs and entrepreneurs in general. Other packages are geared towards assisting businesses in distress. Contact details for officials who will be assisting and providing assistance will be made available later today. Issued by KZN Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs, 30 March 2020