Coronavirus: DA calls for transparency and mass awareness campaign from KZN DoH 5 March 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0']));The Democratic Alliance today calls for transparency from the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Health (DoH) along with the urgent roll-out of a mass awareness campaign. This as the province confirmed its first case of the Coronavirus earlier today. Unfortunately, it was a matter of ‘when’ and not ‘if’ the virus would arrive in our country and our province. As we have seen overseas, it can be a matter of life and death. What matters now is that this is treated as a health crisis and that it is not politicised. The DA has two recommended action steps at this time in the crisis. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0']));The first is for the KZN DoH to roll out an immediate and massive information drive – via leaflets and the media - regarding the virus, how it is spread and precautions individuals can take. Regrettably, there is already fear and concern within our communities, which has been fuelled by social media misinformation. Given this, it is very concerning that the Department has not yet started distributing their promised Coronavirus leaflets and radio adverts. The second step is for KZN Health MEC, Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu and her Department to commit to absolute transparency when it comes to the people of KZN. Members of the province’s Health Portfolio Committee, which includes the DA, must also have access to inspect KZN's designated hospital to ensure our readiness. This transparency will also stop the spread of false news and misinformation. While the KZN Health Committee has already received a presentation from the MEC regarding the four hospitals which are dedicated Coronavirus treatment centres - Greys, Addington, Ngwelezane and Manguzi our main concern is the lack of parliamentary oversight regarding their preparedness. As the DA, we are currently working with the portfolio committee for urgent inspection visits to these facilities. Of particular concern is the lack of dedicated budget for equipment and protective gear and we need to see for ourselves whether they are truly ready. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));In the interim, the DA welcomes the arrival of tracing teams from the National Institute of Communicable Diseases (NICD). These professional teams should assist to prevent any community spread of Coronavirus and we expect a full briefing from the MEC following her meeting with them today. The DA is committed to keeping the people of KZN informed when it comes to the Coronavirus. We also wish to emphasise to MEC Simelane-Zulu that if she commits to full transparency, she will find an ally and a partner in the DA in ensuring that the spread of infection is stopped and the infected receive the best possible treatment. Issued by Rishigen Viranna, DA KZN Spokesperson on Health, 5 March 2020