Gauteng Department of Health making strides in its recovery journey 8 March 2020 The Gauteng Department of Health (GDoH) continues to make significant strides towards the achievement of its targets and key priorities for the 2019/2020 financial year. The Department’s third quarter (October 2019 – December 2019) performance review shows that the continuing war on vacant posts and the filling of critical positions, implementing the mediation process to curtail medico-legal claims, giving attention to weak supply chain management capacity within the department are some of the factors contributing to steady improvements in the overall business environment. The total spending of GDoH’s budget as at 29 February 2020 amounts to 90.2% of the total allocation of R 51,5bn for the year. The department remains liquid as a results it is able to settle its obligations when they fall due. Furthermore, the Department expects to surpass its budgeted revenue of R526 million as a results of a maturing relationship with its revenue collecting implementing agents. In terms of the budget spent on township enterprises against identified commodities, the Department has exceeded the set target of 26% by 0,47% which is aimed at advancing SMMEs and contributing to Job creation and economic growth. There is also positive improvement on compliance to pay suppliers in 30 days. The Department has improved from 53% in quarter one to 77% in quarter three during this financial year. A comparison of quarter three performance over the last four financial years also shows significant improvement having moved from 41% in 2016/2017 to 77% in 2019/2020. Access to 24 hour services at Community Health Centres has improved in the period under review exceeding the set target of 94% by 3%. To improve emergency medical services, new 190 Emergency Medical Services vehicles were distributed to the five Gauteng Districts to supplement the existing fleet. The provincialisation of EMS in City of Johannesburg was completed at the end of December and implemented in January 2020. The process of provincialising the Ekurhuleni EMS is expected to be completed in few months’ time. This will contribute significantly to reducing emergency response time. Facilitating better access to healthcare facilities and improving clinical services through new infrastructure remains a key priority of the 6th Administration. The following facilities were completed in the 3rd quarter Kekana Gardens Clinic, Randgate Clinic and Dewagensdrift Clinic. Improving patients’ experience of care is one of the ways of restoring confidence in the public healthcare system and as such close attention is paid to speedily resolving complaints at our health facilities. 95% of complaints received from our facilities combined were resolved within 25 working days. The number of people tested for HIV in the previous quarter was surpassed by 50% from the set target. In the 3rd quarter over 3 million HIV tests were performed enabling attainment of the first 90 (of the 90-90-90 global targets). The Transmission Rate from mother to child program is on track towards elimination of transmissions although the 1.3% target was not met in last quarter. In order to reach the set target pregnant mothers are encouraged to book early for antenatal care. In this quarter, male condom distribution target proved to be a challenge due to stock shortages attributed to the SABS processes that prolonged supplies from the manufacturers to the appointed suppliers to the province. Of the 10 suppliers only three were able to deliver stock (25 530 000 – 46% of set target of 55 000 000) for quarter 3, which was completed in January 2020. The National Department of Health is currently intervening by delivering 12 000 000 male condoms to various Primary Distribution sites. The Department has prioritized the filling of critical posts across its facilities and as such 11 posts for hospital CEOs were successfully filled and the process is underway to fill the vacancies for the remaining three hospitals. About 83 critical posts have been shifted to Tembisa Provincial Tertiary hospital and can be filled as of 12th February 2020. The hospital has in the past been negatively affected by the lack of capacity. The Gauteng Department of Health remains steadfast in its journey of recovery through a committed to improving patients’ experience of care and providing quality healthcare to the people of Gauteng Province. Issued by Kwara Kekana, Spokesperson to MEC for Health, 8 March 2020