Covid-19: NW Department of Health needs to shift to a proactive approach 17 March 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_0',112,'0','0']));Yesterday, during a meeting with the Department of Health at the North West Provincial Legislature (NWPL) on the province’s state of preparedness to contain the spread of the Coronavirus (Covid-19), several precautionary measures were discussed. The Democratic Alliance (DA) is concerned that, while acknowledging the seriousness of the pandemic, the Department conceded that a lot of work still needs to be done. Despite the increase in the number of new diagnoses daily, no Covid-19 cases have been reported in the North West Province. The Department will however miss the current window of opportunity of being adequately prepared unless they drastically improve on its current state of readiness. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));It is a grave concern that the NWPL continues with business as usual. While the World Health Organisation (WHO) consistently encourages regular handwashing, the bathrooms at the Legislature building have no warm running water or soap available. During his announcement of a disaster situation on Sunday evening, President Cyril Ramaphosa encouraged people to practice social distance by limiting contact and yet Members of the Provincial Legislature are crammed into committee rooms, with limited space and little to no 'social distancing". In line with the President’s announcement, schools, creches and universities will be closed from 18 March to 14 April. However, the Department is concerned about the regulation of creches, as many are informal institutions. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_2',114,'0','0']));Considering the impact on the economy, the two busiest borders separating North West from Botswana will remain open, namely Ramatlabama and Skilpadshek. The screening will, however, be increased at these ports of entry. A protocol has been implemented at these ports of entry which includes a questionnaire, temperature screening, and if needed, isolation and assessment at the Clinic. During the meeting it was revealed that the military health services will not currently be actively involved in the medical aspect at border posts, but will instead increase patrols in securing the borders, although concerns about Person Protective Equipment (PPE) have been raised. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_4',115,'0','0']));During a previous oversight inspection at the Kopfontein Border Post, the Department again stated that port health inspectors are not operating optimally, which needs urgent attention if the spread of the Covid-19 virus is to be curbed. Despite the challenges of shortage of equipment, medication and food, the Department of Health assured us that the following measures are in place in North West: 290 available isolation beds; A hospital in each district has been earmarked for isolation; Dedicated ambulances have been assigned to transport suspected Corona patients; The Department has recently appointed 30 new ALS paramedics; and An amount of R21 million has been ringfenced in readiness to respond to the Coronavirus. Due to the seriousness of this disease, we request members of the public to be responsible with sharing any information pertaining to this virus, as fake news sparks unnecessary panic. In an attempt to communicate facts about Covid-19, the Department will be distributing pamphlets. We further advise that the following precautionary measures be taken: If no sanitizer is available, use soap and water and wash hands for at least 30 seconds; Refrain from sharing water basins, use running water where possible; Patients with flu-like symptoms should wear masks, and seek medical advice; and Avoid using any form of public transport. Anyone experiencing flu-like symptoms is encouraged to contact a doctor or visit their local hospital. The National Department of Health has set up a 24-hour information hotline on 0800 029 999. The DA will closely monitor the situation to ensure that plans are not merely created but realistic, implemented and closely monitored. Issued by Gavin Edwards,DA North West Spokesperson on Health and Social Development, 17 March 2020