MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube on measures to curb outbreak of Covid-19 Coronacirus in KwaZulu-Natal 19 March 2020 Big business fights coronavirus: R2, 5 million worth of sanitary and diapers to be received today. Durban: Following the outbreak of Coronavirus, I wish to express my appreciation to the captains of industry for their timely intervention. Today, I will join the Premier of KwaZulu-Natal SihleZikalala during a handover function of over R2, 5 million worth of 500 000 sanitary and diapers. We thank Edison Power Group for demonstrating patriotism and showing deep love for the people of this province. Undoubtedly, this much needed donation will assist in strengthening the fight against this outbreak which has crippled economies of various countries. As the department we are continuously gathering economic data and monitoring economic trends. There are countries that have experienced a significant drop in revenue as a result of falling economic activity. Many countries are already facing lower export revenues due to a decline in commodity prices and falling tourism. This province is already feeling the negative impact of the virus, especial on tourism front.  Our entities, KZN Tourism Authority and KZN Convention Bureau have already postponed international events which have a combined value of R32 million. A consolidated list and costs associated with the postponement of many other events will be made public. We wish to indicate that a recovery plan driven by research, sound economic planning and extensive consultation is what we are currently undertaking as the department. We are exploring the possibilities of putting together stimulus packages to intervene in sectors of the economy that have been hardest hit by the outbreak. These will be announced once finalized. In conclusion, we will announce details of public entities that will receive donations from captains of industry. Many have indicated their intention to use their Corporate Social Investment Initiatives to augment government’s fight against the outbreak of coronavirus. Issued by Ndabezinhle Sibiya on behalf of MEC Nomsua Dube-Ncube, 19 March 2020