POPCRU pleads for cooperation in our joint fight against Covid-19 outbreak 24 March 2020 The Police and Prisons Civil Rights Union (POPCRU) has noted, and takes seriously the imperative measures announced by President Cyril Ramaphosa in containing the relentless spread of the Covid-19 pandemic currently threatening to immerse our country and the rest of the world. This decision to implement a national shutdown from Thursday midnight comes at a time when we are all aware of the daily increases in the number of new infections from this outbreak, and is indeed the only defensible measure in curbing this outbreak. As we enter these unchartered waters, we urge our communities to fully cooperate with the many police men and women, health workers, traffic officials and other servants of the nation who will be on duty during this challenging period. This is a new chapter in the history of our democratic South Africa, and as has been demonstrated in the past by uniting in the fight against the evils of the apartheid system, so can we once more forge unity and display our joint effort in overcoming this pandemic. The survival of our nation is priority, and in these defining times, we need to inculcate a culture of cooperation and obedience to the guidelines as provided by government. We believe our cooperation will define our greatness as a nation. In the Safety and Security Sectoral Bargaining Council (SSSBC), parties discussed and agreed on the establishment of the South African Police Service (SAPS) Steering Committee on Covid-19. The SAPS management has since implemented this decision by ensuring that the Steering Committee is established and fully functional, and inclusive of all stakeholders. This Committees will ensure the following; The SAPS provides all necessary protective equipment Members who are tested positive for the Covid-19 are granted Special Leave, and such leave must be supported by a medical certificate among others. All employees who worked closely with, or were in contact with an infected person must be instructed to undergo a Covid-19 test, and must be self-quarantined or isolated for a period of 14 calendar days, authorised as Special Leave. If an employee presents themselves to work with symptoms consistent with Covid-19, they must immediately be directed to consult a medical facility, and such an employee to be temporarily isolated in a sick bay or a room identified for temporary isolation while arrangements are made for them to be transported to a medical facility. Employees must be encouraged to seek medical attention if they display flu-like symptoms, and must not report for duty. In the event where an employee contracts Covid-19 as a result of the execution of official duty, such cases must be treated as injury on duty. As our first line of defence, we want to commend the selfless endeavours our public service members continue to provide, and plead with communities to fully comply with all enacted measures. Issued by Richard Mamabolo, National Spokesperson, POPCRU, 24 March 2020