Eskom rolling blackouts a terminal disease on an ailing North West economy 11 March 2020 Note to Editors: Please find attached soundbites in English and Afrikaans, as well as Afrikaans and English video recordings, by Joe McGluwa, DA North West Provincial Leader. The DA calls on the people of North West to join hands with us in our struggle to free ourselves from the oppression of Eskom. DA North West Members of Parliament, the Provincial Legislature and Councillors throughout all municipalities will over the coming days embark on a massive campaign to seek support from ordinary people in our fight to ensure constant electricity supply. The escalation in stages of rolling blackouts in the North West will have a severe negative impact on the provincial economy, the delivery of services, most notably in health and education, as well as disrupt and frustrate the daily lives of ordinary people. On a Stage 4 Eskom rolling blackout, municipalities in the North West have to endure up to 9 hours of suspended electricity supply in a 24 hour cycle. This extended suspension in electricity supply disrupts economic activity, the delivery of education and health services, causes traffic congestion and increases the risk of damage to industrial, agricultural and domestic equipment and appliances. The downstream financial costs of rolling blackouts are enormous, not to mention the impact on the deteriorating quality of life of people. The North West provincial economy has for years now tinkered on full scale recession, showing negative growth, even with a security in electricity supply. Currently more than 750 000 people in the province are unemployed. The extended unemployment rate is at 43%. With rolling blackouts, more businesses will scale down on its operations in order to mitigate against rising input costs. This will definitely result in more people losing their jobs. Many small businesses that can barely make ends meet are threatened with closure. In Potchefstroom, Mahikeng, Rustenburg, Brits and Klerksdorp, rolling blackouts severely hamper the functioning of universities and colleges. Schools across the province are also affected. Not all public health clinics and hospitals have the means to operate under extended rolling blackouts. The cost of operating industrial diesel generators syphon off massive amounts from funds that should ideally be applied to improve service delivery. In Brits specifically, large scale manufacturing industries are unable to operate effectively. These are large scale employers and the lifeblood of the local economy. The impact on the mining sector, another large scale employment sector, will also be further hampered in its business activities. The DA has a plan to ensure electricity supply that will not only improve economic growth and increase job creation, but will also remarkably improve the lives of ordinary people. The DA proposes that: South Africans be allowed to generate their own electricity in their homes and be compensated for feeding surplus electricity into the grid. To assist ordinary people with this programme, the DA proposed a tax incentive for homeowners who opt to install domestic solar systems of up to R75 000.00; VAT on LED lightbulbs and energy-efficient appliances be scrapped; Metros and municipalities should be authorised to purchase electricity directly from Independence Power Producers (IPPs). The DA governed metro, the City of Cape Town is currently before court to seek relief which will compel the Minister of Energy to approve this measure. We look forward to engaging with the people of North West. Together, we can win this battle and improve the economic prospects of not only North West, but the entire country. Issued by Joe McGluwa,DA North West Provincial Leader, 11 March 2020