EFF statement on the first Covid-19-related deaths in SA 27 March 2020 The EFF notes with sadness the passing of two South Africans in the Westem Cape who had tested positive for COVID-19. These are the first deaths to be reported in South Africa since the pandemic reached the country. The rise in the number of people that have tested positive for COVID-19 and the recent deaths must be an indication to us all that the situation is serious. We urge all South Africans to adhere to the rules Of the National Lockdown. follow the precautionary measures set out by the Department of Health and to STAY AT HOME. We call on all employers that insist on remaining fully operational to desist and shutdown their companies. These unfortunate deaths should be a wakeup call to all of us regarding the gravity of the COVID-19 pandemic, as such we should all be a part of preventing its spread. We further call on all law enforcement agencies and security forces to serve our people with dignity and compassion during this difficult time. Women and children must be protected and treated with absolute respect and care. The LGBTQI community must also be treated with the care and respect during this difficult time. It is a well-known fact that the police in this country don't have adequate training in dealing with gender based violence and cases of rape. They must be sensitized to deal with cases of Gender Based Violence in the exceptional situation we find ourselves in. The SANDF and the SAPS must take the calls and needs of women seriously at the level of health care and safety, especially when it comes to cases Of rape and gender based violence in general. We call on all South Africans to remain safe and make use of the hotlines provided by government to address any cases Of abuse in the household and health care needs. Our prayers are with the families of those who have passed away in the Western Cape. We pass Our sincerest condolences and may their loved ones Rest In Peace. Let's us all remain strong and take care Of Our health. WE SHALL OVERCOME!!! Issued by Vuyani Pambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 27 March 2020