ANC statement on precautionary measures to be undertaken to curb spread of novel corona 16 March 2020 The African National Congress welcomes efforts by Government to roll out precautionary measures following the World Health Organisation assessment of the risk of spread and impact of COVID-19 and subsequent declaration of global pandemic . The African National Congress makes a clarion call to our structures at all levels to be at the centre of mass mobilisation to win the battle related to COVID -19 through the following measures - Mass education to the country's population about the virus and preventive actions. - expand surveillance, to find, isolate and care for every case, and to trace every contact - the fight against COVID 19 is not only a government responsibility but a responsibility of the whole of society. - Make sure that your homes and workplaces are clean and hygienic. - Washing your hands regularly and thoroughly - seeking urgent medical care when coughing or having breathing problems - follow strictly the preventative instructions from the South African cabinet , WHO, and department of health. This will go a long way in arresting the spread of the virus Accordingly, the ANC calls on all its structures to be at the forefront of the community efforts to combat the spread of the virus. Similarly and as part of its ongoing efforts to mitigate against the spread of the global andemic - COVID 19,the ANC has instructed all its structures across the length and breadth of the country to be part of this collective effort. On the same token, after intense consideration , the leadership of the ANC has taken a proactive action, to postpone its scheduled visit to the Sharpeville area tomorrow. We take this opportunity to humbly apologise to the Families of the victims of the massacre whom we were expected to visit, including structures of the ANC in the Sedibeng Region of Gauteng, who have been hard at work to ensure that our visit becomes a success . The ANC takes this opportunity to extend a message of solidarity to the whole of global community and mankind. We deeply express our profound and heartfelt message of condolences to all the affected families and those who lost their loved ones . The ANC reiterates its confidence on the capacity and commitment of our government to overcome this global pandemic. To this end , an extended National Working Committee meeting has been convened for Monday the 16th of March 2020 to further consolidate and enrich our approach in dealing with the COVID-19 outbreak. Issued by Ace Magashule, Secretary General, ANC, 16 March 2020