South African and the Indian Ocean Rim Associaton (IORA) 10 March 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_0',112,'0','0']));This month, March 2020,  marks 23 years since the establishment of the Indian Ocean Rim Association for Regional Cooperation (IOR-ARC), now known as the Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA), in 1997. As the association grows and expands, it is important that we take stock of what it has achieved since its inception and and how member states could further chart the way forward. As part of this organisation’s many milestones, South Africa recently completed two years of chairing IORA from October 2017 to November 2019, when Minister Naledi Pandor handed over the Chairship of the Association to the Government of the United Arab Emirates (UAE) in Abu Dhabi in November 2019. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));Many people would ask the question; what is IORA and why is this issue important to South Africa? The answer is very simple: IORA is the foremost organisation in the Indian Ocean, an ocean that provides critical sea trade routes connecting the Middle East, Africa, Asia, and Australasia; through which half of the world’s container ships, one-third of the world’s bulk cargo traffic and two-thirds of the world’s oil shipments pass. It contains heavy mineral deposits and is rich in energy reserves, producing nearly 40% of the world’s offshore petroleum; a valuable resource and a main driver for the Indian Ocean Rim economies. It holds great potential for innovation, job creation, and sustainable socio-economic development. The Indian Ocean is the “inheritance” of these countries and IORA is perceived as the “custodian of this inheritance”, with a focus on bettering the lives of all the people of the region, based on the principle of the Indian Ocean being characterised as a region of peace and stability for sustainable development. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_2',114,'0','0']));IORA was an initiative of the late President Nelson Mandela when, during an official visit to India in 1995, he said: “the natural urge of the facts of history and geography should broaden itself to include the concept of an Indian Ocean Rim for the socio-economic cooperation …” This has resulted in the late President of South Africa being regarded as the “founding Father” of IORA.  In this way, he secured a leading role for South Africa in IORA from its establishment in Mauritius in 1997 to date. As a result, South Africa held the IORA Chairship for the period 2017 to 2019. The current Secretary-General, Ambassador Nomvuyo Nokwe, is a South African citizen. The Indian Ocean region is one of the most diverse regions of the world, with a heterogeneous mix of developed countries (such as Australia), developing countries (such as Sri Lanka), small island states (such as the Comoros) and Least Developed Countries (such as Yemen). With the exception of Australia, all IORA Member States are members of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). Today IORA boasts 22 Member States, namely: Australia, Bangladesh, Comoros, India, Indonesia, Iran, Kenya, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius, Mozambique, Oman, Seychelles, Singapore, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, Thailand, United Arab Emirates and Yemen, and with ten Dialogue Partners: China, Egypt, France, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, the United States of America, Turkey, South Korea and Italy. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_4',115,'0','0']));IORA is essentially an economic cooperative community of littoral and island States whose shores are washed by the Indian Ocean. It is a Charter-based regional multilateral organisation that is collegial in nature. It seeks to build and expand understanding and mutually beneficial cooperation through a consensus-based, evolutionary and non-intrusive approach. The cooperation is based on the principles of sovereign equality, territorial integrity, and political independence, non-interference in internal affairs, peaceful coexistence, and mutual benefit. The South African Chairship of IORA was guided by an overarching theme: “IORA – Uniting the Peoples of Africa, Asia, Australasia and the Middle East through Enhanced Cooperation for Peace, Stability and Sustainable Development”. It prioritized the strengthening of trade and investment cooperation to promote sustainable and equitable economic growth;stressed the importance of the empowerment of women and the youth; and the development of Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs).  This resulted in the signing of an IORA Memorandum of Understanding on the Promotion of Small and Medium Enterprises in the Indian Ocean region. South Africa focused on the maximisation of commonalities and opportunities arising from South Africa’s Operation Phakisa: Oceans Economy programme and IORA’s Blue Economy strategic outlook; promoted the advancement of women’s economic empowerment and gender equality within IORA and secured the establishment of the IORA Working Group on Women’s Economic Empowerment within IORA. Considering the importance of tourism, South Africa prioritized the establishment of a Core Group on Tourism as a formal mechanism for IORA member countries to develop the tourism sector in the Indian Ocean region. Under South Africa’s guidance the importance of water and the management of water were recognised as a crucial resource for economic development in the Indian Ocean region.  The Water Research Commission (WRC) was identified as a potentialIORA Centre of Excellence in advancing this important theme within the Indian Ocean region. Under South Africa’s guidance, IORA supported UN Resolution 2832 on the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace, established the IORA Working Group on Maritime Safety and Security and, through the IORA Academic Group, secured a proactive research and innovation agenda to support the work programme of IORA. At the conclusion of the South African IORA Chairship in 2019 and to commemorate the lasting influence of President Mandela on IORA, a Special Declaration was adopted to not only commemorate President Mandela’s Centenary, but also to enhance his legacy as the Father of IORA by establishing the IORA Nelson Mandela “Be the Legacy” internship programme at the IORA Secretariat in Mauritius. The Internship Programme is aimed at empowering and capacitating the youth of the Indian Ocean region to ensure the continued priority being placed on the protection of our inheritance through IORA as the foremostorganisation in the Indian Ocean. The future of IORA is inextricably linked to the commitment of the IORA Member States in ensuring that this important organisation becomes a global voice for peaceful and sustainable development; that its principles are premised on advancing multilateralism, particularly in the context of the current global environment, which is characterized by the rise of populism and nationalism. South Africa views IORA as an important platform for the articulation of our Foreign Policy, which upholds the importance of multilateralism and global collaboration in resolving the intricate challenges facing the World. Ambassador Anil Sooklal is the Deputy Director-General for the Branch Asia and Middle East at the Department of International Relations and Cooperation (DIRCO)