EY throws support behind Minister Mboweni’s plan for review of SA’s auditing practices 11 March 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0']));South African Finance Minister Tito Mboweni announced the appointment of an independent panel to review the practices of the auditing profession during his recent budget speech in a move that has now been endorsed by EY. Ajen Sita, CEO of EY Africa, expressed support for the introduction of the panel and has committed to assist government to fulfil its important mandate. “We continue to support any efforts to further enhance audit quality and restore trust in our profession. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0']));“It is crucial for the continued attractiveness of capital markets that there is trust in our financial reporting ecosystem. EY is committed to playing its full part in ensuring that the profession continues to best serve business, investors and other public interest stakeholder needs.” Although full details of the review have not yet been released, it is thought the terms of reference could be similar to the broad reviews seen in countries such as the UK, Australia and the Netherlands in recent years. Globally, recent high-profile corporate failures have weakened public trust and confidence in both the auditing profession and business at large. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));Stephen Ntsoane, Assurance Leader for EY South Africa, added: “Globally we have seen several reviews of auditing practices – most recently India where the Ministry of Corporate Affairs (MCA) proposed extensive reforms to address issues around auditor independence, accountability and market concentration. “We believe that it will be prudent for South Africa to embark on a similar review.” Ntsoane added that it was important that the planned review to take into account not only international trends, but also to factor in specific industry challenges as well as what is already underway in South Africa. “All these changes need to be aligned across the financial reporting ecosystem through comprehensive regulation,” he noted. The Independent Regulatory Board for Auditors (IRBA) in South Africa has already introduced various measures to address some of the potential areas of improvement in the South African environment, including the introduction of Audit Quality Indicators (AQIs) to assist firms and their clients to identify potential areas of risk. There are also several other changes underway in South Africa, including amendments to the Auditing Profession Act, the Companies Act and several changes to the global codes of conduct for auditors issued by the International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants. These changes are ordinarily adopted in South Africa to ensure that local standards are fully aligned to global standards. Issued by Grant Henry on behalf of EY, 11 March 2020