City appeals for due consideration for social grant beneficiaries 29 March 2020 The City of Cape Town notes with concern that far too many people, as is seen across South Africa including in Cape Town -  are not adhering to the national lockdown that was instituted in a bid to curb the spread of COVID-19. This type of behaviour massively compromises public safety, and strains the efforts of law enforcement agencies who have been tasked with enforcing the lockdown. Today, myself and Mayoral Committee Member for Safety JP Smith, went on an aerial assessment of compliance with the lockdown. I was pleased to see many communities adhering to the rules and curbing the spread of the virus by staying home. However, I was concerned to see a number of neighbourhoods, going about their business as usual, placing the lives of countless people at risk. While the public is allowed to leave their homes to buy essential goods, medication and to seek medical care where required, the City renews its appeal to residents to move around only when it is very necessary, and to observe hygiene and social distancing protocols that have been communicated at length, at all times. Furthermore, we appeal to residents to take into account that the distribution of social grants will commence tomorrow. We are therefore expecting an increase in the number of persons who will leave their homes to collect their grants and to visit the shops to stock up on essential goods. Given that social distancing is a key prevention measure to curb the spread of COVID-19, we ask that residents do their utmost to avoid visiting shops in the next three to four days, to allow grant beneficiaries an opportunity to do so. COVID-19 has presented an unprecedented challenge to South Africa, and to many other countries around the world, and it requires collective effort to ensure everyone’s safety. Now, more than ever, kindness and consideration for ourselves, but also the welfare of others should be uppermost in everyone’s minds – especially our vulnerable groups. Issued by Media Office, City of Cape Town, 29 March 2020