ANC on mission to loot Joburg coffers by reversing insourcing of workers 8 March 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in Gauteng is not surprised by the ANC-led City of Joburg administration’s intention to reverse the insourcing of the security guards and cleaners. This action by the ANC-led Joburg administration is clearly an effort to reverse the gains that were achieved by the DA-led coalition government. The DA-led multiparty administration insourced over 2000 security guards and cleaners, so as to ensure their job security as well as their access to medical aid and pensions. This was also a step in the right direction to eradicate the use of labour brokers and end the exploitation of workers. In addition, the security guards and cleaners that were insourced are earning a market related salary. The ANC’s claim that the process was not done legally and that more people were employed than was initially on the books is not true. Furthermore, this action by the ANC administration once again highlights that they care little about the needs of those providing services to the municipality and are only interested in lining the pockets of cadres. It has also become a norm where the ANC governs that security and cleaning tenders are awarded to card carrying members of the ANC who in return flout labour laws and do not even pay the minimum wage. The DA will continue to put pressure on the ANC to not reverse this insourcing. Failure to do this will indicate that the ANC is only focused on their own interests. Issued by Sergio Isa dos Santos, DA Gauteng Joburg Central Constituency Head, 8 March 2020 ANC on mission to loot Joburg coffers – DA Gauteng Party says opposition plans on reversing insourcing of workers ANC on mission to loot Joburg coffers by reversing insourcing of workers 8 March 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in Gauteng is not surprised by the ANC-led City of Joburg administration’s intention to reverse the insourcing of the security guards and cleaners. This action by the ANC-led Joburg administration is clearly an effort to reverse the gains that were achieved by the DA-led coalition government. The DA-led multiparty administration insourced over 2000 security guards and cleaners, so as to ensure their job security as well as their access to medical aid and pensions. This was also a step in the right direction to eradicate the use of labour brokers and end the exploitation of workers. In addition, the security guards and cleaners that were insourced are earning a market related salary. The ANC’s claim that the process was not done legally and that more people were employed than was initially on the books is not true. Furthermore, this action by the ANC administration once again highlights that they care little about the needs of those providing services to the municipality and are only interested in lining the pockets of cadres. It has also become a norm where the ANC governs that security and cleaning tenders are awarded to card carrying members of the ANC who in return flout labour laws and do not even pay the minimum wage. The DA will continue to put pressure on the ANC to not reverse this insourcing. Failure to do this will indicate that the ANC is only focused on their own interests. Issued by Sergio Isa dos Santos, DA Gauteng Joburg Central Constituency Head, 8 March 2020