Government must take responsibility for the destruction of SA Express 31 March 2020 The National union of Metalworkers of South Africa (NUMSA) and the South African Cabin Crew Association (SACCA) have noted the statement issued by the Department of Public Enterprises on the 29th of March on the situation at SA Express. In the letter the Department of Public Enterprises is responding to the application by the Business Rescue Practitioners to place SA Express under liquidation. The situation is compounded by the fact that most of our members have not received their salaries for the month of March, and they were unable to prepare for the lockdown. They are suffering as a result of the mismanagement of this State Owned Entity. We must not mince our words the destruction of SA Express is because government as the shareholder is not committed to saving our State Owned Entities, especially those in aviation. It seems what we have been warning about in relation to SOE’s is coming to fruition. We always suspected that eventually the rampant looting and corruption, which government as the shareholder consistently turned a blind eye to for many years, would be the death knell of our SOE’s and this has turned out to be true in the case of SA Express, and it seems very likely that SAA and Eskom will also follow suit. The BRP’s claim that it was not their intention to file for liquidation, but because government failed to cooperate and give confidence to creditors they had no choice. The Department of Public Enterprises (DPE) on the other hand claims that the BRP’s plan “did not meet the basic requirements as it lacked a credible business case that could enable the unlocking of the required post commencement finance (PCF) that would allow the rescue process to proceed and for a long-term plan to be developed.” Meanwhile whilst the two sides bickered the eventual stalemate between the two parties worsened the situation and now SA Express is on the verge of liquidation. Workers and their families’ will suffer the most during this Lockdown simply because government the board and the executives failed in their duties as leaders. All are equally responsible for the destruction of this airline and they do not have the luxury of absolving themselves from the mess they created. On the subject of salaries, we are surprised that DPE is mentioning the TERS application only now, when this proposal has been on the table since last year in December when the CCMA proposed it during the section 189 process. Unfortunately, no one followed up including the executive management and they only responded after NUMSA and SACCA prompted them to do so. DPE says it has applied to speed up the process unfortunately we still have no time frame of how long this process will take. It does seem that the Coronavirus is helping some factions within the state to drive their agenda for the whole sale destruction of our SOE’s through liquidation. The crisis at SA Express could have been avoided if DPE and Treasury had genuinely supported SOE’s which is their mandate, but what we have seen, with regards to SAA, and SA Express and even Eskom is that government sabotages efforts to turn them around, because they want to justify the entrance of the private sector in these entities. It is shameful that under the watch of Pravin Gordhan as minister of Public Enterprises, SA Express is being liquidated, and SAA and Eskom are in ICU. The destruction of these entities is part of the legacy of the ANC-led government and they must own it. Issued by Phakamile Hlubi-Majola, NUMSA National Spokesperson, 31 March 2020