EFF rejects Ramaphosa’s expressed intention to sell Eskom power stations 6 March 2020 The Economic Freedom Fighters rejects with contempt an expressed intention by Mr. Cyril Ramaphosa to sell ESKOM Power Stations. During his address to Journalists in Cape Town on Monday, the 3rd of March 2020, Mr. Ramaphosa said "A number of players have come to the fore and said that when we get to the point of decommission, sell them to us and we can generate electricity. I'm most interested in looking at that option". Mr. Ramaphosa further said, "l believe we have now arrived at a stage where our power generation has entered a new era that should be driven not by ideology but by pragmatism. What that means is that whoever can deliver energy should do so". In saying all these things, Ramaphosa confirms his intention to sell ESKOM power generation to the people who gave him money to buy the ANC Conference. Ramaphosa is now confirming what the EFF marched against and always said that the aim of to unbundling ESKOM is to sell off its generation capacity to the greedy capitalist establishment. The EFF rejects the intention to sell off ESKOM generation to private companies and as part of this programme will escalate our rolling mass action to all provinces. The EFF also cautions the potential buyers of ESKOM power stations that we will mobilize workers and communities to physically prevent any private company from operating ESKOM power stations. The day Ramaphosa announces the actual sale of ESKOM power stations will be the day the EFF announces a campaign on #RamaphosaMustGo and the campaign will be more militant than the #ZumaMustGo campaign that we led when Zuma handed over power to the Gupta criminal syndicate. We will not allow Ramaphosa to sell off State Owned Companies in the same way we refused Zuma from handing power to the Guptas. We call on all progressive forces to join hands with the EFF to fight against the capitalist capture of South African government under Ramaphosa. We also call on all progressive forces in the congress movement to reject Ramaphosa's capitalist mannerisms and logic of incapacitating the State for profit purposes. The people of South Africa should stand in unison to defend our key entities and assets against the white capitalist establishment that control the puppet President Ramaphosa. Issued by Vuyani Pambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 6 March 2020