DA calls for dismissal of Acting Tshwane City Manager for flouting procurement processes 18 September 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) is shocked to learn that multiple small business owners are attempting to claim R20 million from the City in invoices for services provided during lockdown to support the homeless and vulnerable. The unlawfully deployed ANC administrators in Tshwane haphazardly used multiple service providers during the lockdown, effectively abandoning legislative supply chain processes which require formal procurement reports. Head administrator, Mpho Nawa, who should have full oversight over these processes, has attempted to shirk responsibility in vaguely indicating that he has suspended a senior manager. Similarly, the current ANC Acting City Manager, Maseabata Mutlaneng, who has total control over the city's supply chain processes, as the chief accounting officer in the City, has failed to take the appropriate action that her job requires. She should therefore be urgently removed from her post. This is a total governance failure. While the service providers are demanding payment, the unlawful ANC administrators are unable to effectively assess which services they provided and their overall value. As due process was not followed in their appointments, all of the funds that these service providers may receive will be deemed as irregular in audit findings, which will be made against the ANC administrators. In order for any payments to be made they will also have to be signed off by the Acting City Manager. Months after these issues occurred, Nawa has now indicated that a formal city investigation is underway. This is likely because both the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) and the Hawks are currently investigating the city’s spending irregularities under the ANC administrators. It is time for the unlawful ANC administrators to be fully transparent regarding the procurement that took place during the lockdown period particularly, as it pertains to protective personal equipment (PPE) and social relief. We call on them to urgently release the details of all the companies who received PPE tenders including the quantities and value of the goods provided to the City. Issued by Randall Williams, DA Tshwane Mayoral Candidate, 18 September 2020