DA calls for biannual report on food security as one in every four people in KZN go hungry  30 September 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) has called for KwaZulu-Natal’s (KZN) Agriculture and Development Department (DARD) to provide a twice annual report on the state of food security in the province in order to keep track on food security. The appeal, made in writing to KZN Agriculture and Rural Development portfolio committee Chairperson, Ntombikayise Sibhidla-Saphetha, comes after a recent written parliamentary reply  to questions posed by the DA in which Agriculture MEC, Bongiwe Sithole-Moloi painted an alarming picture of a hungry province. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));As a result of the MEC’s response, the DA has established that almost 25% of the province’s people are classified as food insecure. What this means is that one quarter of the people of KwaZulu-Natal are frequently without food and/or have unreliable access to nutritious and affordable. Essentially, one in every four people in KZN have hunger as their constant companion. To make matters worse, the DA has also uncovered that despite food security being a major part of its core mandate, the Department currently has no food security plan or strategy in place to address this ongoing crisis. Equally worrying, is that the Department also has no mechanism in place at this stage to gauge the long-term impact of its programmes - other than recording the number of beneficiaries and budget spent each financial year. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));It is for these reasons that the DA has written to the Chairperson, with the urgent request that the Department provide the portfolio committee with a full report. We have also emphasised that this report should be presented twice a year to keep track of the status of food security in the province. KZN is blessed with fertile soils and abundant agricultural resources. If properly managed and monitored, there should be adequate food supply for everyone. The DA will work through the parliamentary mechanism to ensure that food security is placed on the agenda and that the people of KZN do not go hungry, now and in the future. Issued by Chris Pappas, DA KZN Spokesperson on Agriculture and Rural Development, 30 September 2020