DA adopts Economic Justice Policy: Redress for the disadvantaged, not for elites Today the Democratic Alliance’s policy conference adopted a policy on Economic Justice: Our plan to beat the past and build the future. This is an important step in the party’s growing focus on policy development. Our Economic Justice policy is based on our recognition that South Africa is still a fundamentally economically unjust society, where opportunities are not available to all, and where poverty still limits the life chances of so many. The DA envisions a society where opportunity is broadly available to all, and where people have the capabilities to make use of them. We are still far from that point as a country.eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_3',112,'0','0'])); Our history of apartheid, as well as bad governance, cadre deployment and corruption in the democratic era, mean that opportunity in South Africa is still deeply skewed. Over two decades of political freedom have not resulted in meaningful progress in the socio-economic prospects of the majority of South Africans. Indeed, as the economy shrinks, poverty is actually growing and opportunities are narrowing. South Africa desperately needs a totally fresh approach to redress and inclusion. The Economic Justice policy sets out our approach to economic redress. Our policy in one sentence is redress for the disadvantaged, not for elites.eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_0',113,'0','0'])); This policy offers an alternative analysis of the challenge: instead of white monopoly capital as the obstacle to economic inclusion we recognise that exclusion is driven by several socioeconomic and governance challenges. These include an incapable state, poor education, lack of jobs, low savings and investments, inadequate public healthcare, high transport costs, lack of affordable housing, and unequal sharing of childcare responsibilities. We will ensure that our governments prioritise working with companies who are making a positive impact in addressing these challenges. Many companies already report on their commitment to Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), an approach which will align financial return and social impact. In contrast to BEE which defers investment. The DA's virtual policy conference that took place yesterday and today was a resounding success with not only the economic justice policy adopted, but also 18 core values ​​and principles that will underlie all policy decisions that the party will make in the future.eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_2',114,'0','0'])); The adoption of the economic justice policy today, with overwhelming support from delegates, is a seminal moment in the history of the DA where we can now offer South Africans a just and workable economic alternative - one that speaks to all South Africans, especially the most disadvantaged, and not, only to cadres and the elite. Statement issued Dr Ivan Meyer - DA Federal Chairperson, 6 September 2020