ANC WELCOMES GOVERNMENT'S DECISION TO MOVE THE COUNTRY TO LOCKDOWN LEVEL 1 The African National Congress (ANC) welcomes the announcement by President Cyril Ramaphosa to move the country to Lockdown Level 1. The lifting of further restrictions on economic and social life, where it is reasonably safe to do so, must be commended. The progress made thus far in the war against COVID-19 was made possible largely by the effective measures that were implemented by the government, the sacrifices of many frontline health workers as all citizens of our country who chose to comply with lockdown measures. We reiterate our position that the objective of the lockdown was to delay the spread of the virus and to prevent a huge surge of infections. A permanent lockdown is neither desirable nor sustainable. As we move forward, we must be guided by the need to save lives and to preserve livelihoods. We remain cautiously optimistic that the decline in infection rates will be sustained and that no resurgence of infections will occur if we maintain the same vigilance and comply with all measures. The gradual and cautious easing of some restrictions will ensure that we do not experience a sudden upsurge. We are encouraged by the commitment of the government to keep increasing coronavirus testing. South Africa has joined the global scientific community in search of a vaccine. We welcome efforts to help improve contact tracing, which is a key weapon in the fight against COVID-19. The ANC government has made this possible through the deployment of the COVID Alert South Africa mobile phone app and the COVID Connect WhatsApp platform. We echo the President's call to the people of South Africa to download the COVID Alert South Africa mobile app which has been zero-rated by mobile networks and can be downloaded for free. eval(ez_write_tag([[468,60],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0']));Indeed, effective testing and contact tracing will help us contain the spread of the spread. The opening of the country to international travel subject to strict precautionary measures will go a long way in resuscitating the tourism sector. The economy has been badly hurt as a result of COVID¬19. The time to rebuild our battered economy must proceed with speed. Once again, we urge all stakeholders to ensure that as more sectors our economy open, we do so mindful of the danger that continues to lurk in our midst. As we open up economic activity, we remember that saving lives is as important as earning a living. Let us ensure that we do not reverse the gains we have made already in our battle to defeat COVID-19. The ANC urges all South Africans to continue playing their part. Let us wear masks, practice good hygiene, observe social distancing and stay safe. We all have a responsibility to help curb any possible surge in transmissions. Statement issued by the ANC, 17 September 2020eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));