DA demands answers on more than 50 people living in squalor in Mpofana town hall for five years  21 September 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) will write to both KwaZulu-Natal’s COGTA and Human Settlements MECs to determine the status of a group more than 50 people who have been forced to live in squalor in the derelict Mpofana town hall for the past five years. This after the municipality failed to allocate housing to them in spite of a court order. The finding was made during a DA oversight inspection in the area. This amid numerous other serious issues within the municipality. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_0',113,'0','0']));By far the most disturbing finding during the DA’s oversight is the discovery that the displaced group of men and women have been living in the town hall for years on end. The conditions under which they are living are also beyond appalling and include; - Two toilets and one shower to share between the more than 50 inhabitants- A lack of proper sleeping areas or beds, with make-shift crates being used- Windows which have been broken for at least the past five years, leaving inhabitants freezing cold during winter- A kitchen tap that does not close, causing thousands of litres of wasted water every month – this despite KZN being a water-scarce province and;- Inadequate cooking facilities given that this is a hall and not designed for large-scale food preparation. The inhabitants of this so-called hostel were moved to the town hall in 2015 after the Bruntville Hostel burned down. They remain there today despite having won a court case three years ago where the municipality was ordered to move them to more suitable accommodation – an order which has not yet been adhered to. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_4',114,'0','0']));The DA is deeply disturbed by the inhumane conditions that this group of people are living in. It is also shocking that they have simply been forgotten by this municipality and left to live in an unsuitable facility for so many years. Meanwhile, the manner in which they have been treated by the municipality, as well as the leadership of the province’s CoGTA and Human Settlements Departments – demands an explanation. Last week, the DA submitted a written parliamentary question to KZN Human Settlements MEC, Peggy Nkonyeni, in a bid to get answers. Our questions include whether the municipality applied to the Department for an Emergency Housing Grant, whether funding was made available and, if so, why the funding was not used to provide temporary housing. Further questions include whether the municipality is still able to request financial aid to in order to house the displaced group of people and whether it has in fact asked for any type of assistance from the Department of Human Settlements regarding this matter. We expect an answer from the MEC within the prescribed 14 days as per the KZN Legislature rules. In the interim, we expect both MEC Nkonyeni and her counterpart, CoGTA MEC, Sipho Hlomuka to account for this debacle. Above all, they must urgently come up with a plan, with specific timelines, in terms of the delivery of housing to this group of people. Issued by Mbali Ntuli and Martin Meyer, DA, 21 September 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_2',115,'0','0']));