SASCOC needs to investigate CSA board member for possible interference in team selection 15 September 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) calls on the South African Sports Confederation and Olympic Committee (SASCOC) to launch an independent investigation into Dr Eugenia Kula-Ameyaw, an independent board member at Cricket South Africa (CSA), related to the worrying reports that the transformation committee at CSA wants to have a say in team selection. It has come to the DA’s attention that Dr Kula-Ameyaw, who is only a temporary board member as she has yet to be voted in, has recently written a letter stating that the transformation committee should play a part in selecting players for the various teams. While the DA has always believed in transformation, player selection should never be subjected to a quota system or left in the hands of board members – especially those with a hidden agenda that has admitted to not even liking the sport they want to transform. It is also problematic that Dr Kula-Ameyaw seems to have had a say in the team selection for the Solidarity Cup. In a tweet she claimed to have been the driving force behind Reeza Hendricks replacing Kagiso Rabada and Temba Bavuma replacing Quinton de Kock as captains after they withdrew from the Solidarity Cup. By making statements like these, Dr Kula-Ameyaw takes away credibility from extremely capable players and captains. She makes it seem like they were not picked on merit, but simply for the colour of their skin. This is a travesty to the many players of colour who have served the ranks of various South African cricket teams over the years. It seeks to diminish their accomplishments and widen the racial divide in South African society. In an oral parliamentary question, the DA has also asked the Minister of Sports, Arts and Culture, Nathi Mthethwa, whether he was aware the Eminent Persons Group (EPG) report on transformation was outdated as it was more than two years old. The CSA transformation committee cannot possibly hope to enact transformation if it’s working with irrelevant information. While the DA supports the transformation of sport in South Africa, it must not be done in a way that is detrimental to the sport and its players. Players should be picked on their skill, and transformation should be done at a grassroots level to ensure that better players rise through the ranks of cricket in South Africa. Issued by Willem Faber, DA Deputy Shadow Minister of Sports, Arts and Culture, 15 September 2020