DA to request SAPS Commissioner to prioritise implementation of rural safety strategy in Tlakgameng, North West 17 September 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) is encouraged by the positive response received following our stakeholder engagements in Tlakgameng, Kagisano-Molopo Local Municipality, yesterday, with the SAPS, the Tlakgameng and the Kagisano-Molopo Farmers Unions, to build sustainable relationships to improve rural safety in the area. We met with the newly appointed SAPS Tlakgameng Cluster Commander, Brigadier Tlhotleng, where we discussed rural safety in the area and any challenges the local SAPS may have. We also raised with him the concerns we received from the local community. Tlakgameng farmers have fallen victim to a host of criminal activity over the last couple of years. Cases of stock theft, poaching, vandalism, illegal land invasions, illegal grazing and intimidation have not been investigated for several years now, while there was no attempt from the SAPS to reach out to the community and build relationships to improve safety and security. Criminals have been emboldened by the lack of effective policing that they now pose for security cameras while executing their criminal deeds. Brigadier Tlhotleng undertook to relook all previous cases lodged. He also undertook to embark on a widescale SAPS community outreach programme, in order to rebuild a relationship of trust between the community and the police. The DA will write to National Police Commissioner, General Sitole, to prioritise Tlakgameng for the implementation of the SAPS Rural Safety Strategy. Tlakgameng is ideally placed to measure the impact of this strategy, and the local police could do with the additional resources that would be made available during the implementation phase. Thankfully, the Tlakgameng community has not fallen victim to brutal farm attacks, but the escalation in crime, specifically the accompanying intimidation, is cause for concern. The speedy implementation of the SAPS Rural Safety Strategy here can bring an end to the general criminality the community is subjected to and prevent any further escalation which might result in another violent farm attack. The DA will continue to play a constructive role in the facilitation of improved relationships between the SAPS, rural communities, agricultural and farmers unions, farmers and farmworkers, specifically in terms of improved visible policing, extended farm patrols, crime prevention, improved investigating capacity, the speedy arrest of perpetrators, and assistance with firearm licences and firearm training, and the utilisation of technology, such as the use of drones. Our engagements in Tlakgameng were the first of several meetings scheduled in North West, to hear first-hand the challenges and concerns faced by agricultural unions, farmers, farmworkers, rural communities and the SAPS. We continue with our engagements in Lichtenburg today and will visit Potchefstroom on Friday. Issued by Annette Steyn and Jacqueline Theologo, DA Shadow Minister of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development and DA North West Spokesperson on Agriculture and Rural Development, 17 September 2020