Premier must initiate and sign anti-corruption pledge  23 September 2020 In the fight to secure a corruption-free heritage for the people of the Northern Cape, the Democratic Alliance (DA) is challenging the premier, Dr Zamani Saul, to initiate and sign an anti-corruption pledge to be circulated amongst all Members of the Executive (MECs) and Members of the Provincial Legislature (MPL). This is the DA’s call ahead of countrywide Heritage Day celebrations tomorrow, that take place in a climate of high scale thieving of government funds and loans that were meant to mitigate the far reaching impact of Covid-19. In particular, the DA notes the recent submissions made by Saul to the media earlier this week, that factionalism within the ANC is fueling corruption because it relies on stolen money to thrive. Saul went on to paint a rather bleak prognosis for the combatting of corruption under a money-hungry faction of the party, that continues to sew deep division within the ruling party. This, he himself concedes, is impeding the party from progressing from anti-corruption talk to action. So much so, that he even openly doubts the ability of the party to renew itself. While this is something that the DA has long since known about the increasingly rotten ANC, that soured exponentially since its time under the leadership of former president Jacob Zuma, it is not something that we should just allow to fester. Yes, come 2023, the current state of the ANC could propel the country to vote out the government of corruption in favour of South Africa’s democracy and our constitution. This said, however, the elections are still another four years away. If looting and government decline is so rampant and prevalent now, what will be left of the state by then if corruption is left unattended? Either our people need to lobby for a referendum to put the ANC behind political bars now, which is unlikely to happen. Alternatively, those within the ANC who still have a moral backbone, need to defiantly fight for what is left of this plundered country, and put politics aside to form a formidable force against corruption. In this regard, what better way than to openly and brazenly stand up against corruption and make their voices heard by publicly pledging allegiance to the battle against corrupt practices. If drastic, continuous and bold action is not taken soon, corruption will define our heritage. We must not allow this. The premier must not allow this. There are more than enough of us willing to join hands against the looting. All he needs to do is sign us up for the fight. Issued by Andrew Louw, DA Northern Cape Provincial Leader, 23 September 2020