Zandile Gumede must step down, now aside 5 September 2020 The latest move by the ANC in the KwaZulu-Natal Legislature - to place disgraced former Mayor of eThekwini, Zandile Gumede, on suspension with full pay - is an example of the ANC paying lip-service to the fight against corruption, as they continue to harbour political fugitives. The IFP is of the opinion that there is simply no such thing as "stepping aside" while being fully compensated for work not done. The people of KZN need all their public representatives to be on duty, and hard at work. We have subsequently written to the Speaker of the KZN Legislature, the ANC top brass in the province and its National Executive at Luthuli House, demanding that Zandile Gumede must step down, not aside. The facts remain: Zandile Gumede - by the admission of the ANC - collapsed the eThekwini Metro and drove service delivery into the ground. The sentiments expressed by the ANC leadership in the province, that the disgraced former Mayor remains innocent until proven guilty, are farcical. She had already proved that she was not fit for purpose in leading the province’s Metro and that she was not capable and able to lead in the eThekwini region. With an alleged R430 million corruption matter hanging over her head, the IFP believes that she should not step aside, but summarily step down from all public positions, in keeping with the latest ANC PR campaign to deal with its corrupt cadres. We have indicated in our letter to the Speaker of the KZN Legislature that the decision to suspend Gumede as a Member of the Legislature would not be sufficient. We have therefore called for her removal within seven days. It is no longer "good enough" to simply suspend those who are alleged to be rotten. The people of our country and, moreover, the residents of KwaZulu-Natal, do not deserve to be served by any individual who may be incapable, incompetent and rotten. The ANC needs to clean up their mess in KZN. The first order of business would be to urgently get rid of former disgraced Mayor, Zandile Gumede, and walk their talk on corruption. Issued by Velenkosini Hlabisa, IFP President and Leader of the Official Opposition in the KZN Legislature, 5 September 2020