MKMVA supports the gradual lifting of the lockdown, but opposes the opening of education facilities now as well as lifting the ban on the sale of cigarettes and calls for emergency assistance to destitute MK veterans 28 April 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0']));The Umkhonto we Sizwe Military Veterans Association (MKMVA) wishes to express our support for the excellent hard work being done by President Cyril Ramaphosa, and the Presidential Task Team (PTT), in the battle against the spread of the COVID19 virus. We applaud President Ramaphosa for the timely and decisive manner in which the lockdown was introduced, and the steps that have been taken to ensure its effectiveness, and that our nation complies with these measures. Our government is also commended for understanding that in our unequal society, still battling with the many socio-economic ills and gross inequalities that we have inherited from apartheid, the majority of black (especially African) people are affected disproportionally negatively by the consequences of the lockdown. The efforts by government to provide shelter to the homeless, and food for those among us who do not have the resources to fend for themselves and are going hungry, as well as the extension of social grants, are strongly supported. We are aware that it is very difficult to adhere to social distancing, and to stay indoors at home, in the crowded conditions and small homes and shelters, in townships and informal settlements where basic amenities are in short supply, and must often be shared by many households. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0']));Our people deserve support and praise for having mostly tried their best to comply with the lockdown regulations, despite these difficult circumstances. Overall we have seen a spirit of compliance, rather than defiance, and a preparedness to make huge sacrifices in order to protect ourselves, our families, children, and our fellow citizens, from being infected by the coronavirus. In the instances where the lockdown regulations are not complied with we support our South African Police Service (SAPS), and South African National Defence Force (SADF) for taking the necessary measures to enforce compliance with the law, and to arrest andcharge those who are making themselves guilty of defiance, and deliberate non-compliance. Being liberation soldiers ourselves, we appreciate the very difficult duties of all who must enforce the law during these challenging times. For the sake of our whole nation we urge them to be firm in carrying out their duties, while simultaneously continuing to be compassionate towards the civilians that our President has deployed them to serve. We urge that this must be done in an even handed manner, without fear or favor. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));MKMVA supports the decision not to lift the lockdown abruptly, and to ease it in carefully controlled stages. This approach is very important in order not to undo the positive results of the lockdown, in terms of containing the spread of the coronavirus and flattening the curve of infection. Many sacrifices have been made by all in our nation to achieve this, and the success that we have registered up to now should not be undone by any hasty, or rash, decisions. We still find ourselves in a precarious situation where the rate of infection continues to be erratic and potentially volatile, and the desired constant tapering down of the daily numbers of infections, and fatalities, have not yet been achieved. Therefore the interactive approach, and flexibility, provided by the staged easing of the lockdown is essential, because in instances where the situation worsens the lockdown can be intensified again - either on a regional, provincial or national basis. There will no doubt be many pressures brought to bear on government to ease the lockdown restrictions as quickly as possible. Obviously the consequences of the lockdown are severe for our economy, and many businesses - especially small and medium size businesses (SMME's) - are fighting for their survival. The further closing down of businesses will cause increasing unemployment and terrible hardships, at a time when unemployment is already awfully high. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_5',115,'0','0']));Having noted these challenges MKMVA, none the less, strongly opposes the lifting on the ban on the sale of cigarettes. Smoking damages our lungs, and overall negatively impacts on the health of people. It is a medical fact that smokers are at a considerably greater health risk. The coronavirus infection being a respiratory disease, smoking directly impacts on the ability of our immune systems to resist infection, and once infected our ability to fight the disease. No matter what lobbying and pressure the cigarette and tobacco industry in general mustered, it is our ardent belief that government took a terribly wrong decision to lift the ban on the sale of cigarettes, and that this decision should immediately be rescinded. MKMVA is also aware that the education of our children must be one of our highest priorities. The future of our nation depends on the education of our largely young population, and equipping them in the best possible way for the advancement of themselves and our nation as a whole. The dangers of compromising, or even loosing, a whole academic year are very real. However, these pressures must always be balanced against the foremost duty of government to safeguard the wellbeing, and lives, of our people. This can, and should, never be subjugated to anything else. It is with this understanding in mind that MKMVA urges our government to resist the temptation to reopen schools and tertiary education facilities at this, still very unstable an precarious stage, in the battle to contain the spread of the coronavirus. These education facilities are by their very nature places where large numbers of young people gather. Class rooms are often overcrowded, and in many instances more than forty children are cramped into one class. Under such conditions social distancing will certainly not be possible, and to put a burden on teachers to enforce the impossible will be most unfair. Evidently this will create some of the worst possible conditions to propagate the spread of the coronavirus among our vulnerable children, and for them to bring such infections back home, and thus to spread the highly infectious coronavirus throughout our communities. Our whole society will, as a consequence, be exposed to further unacceptable risk. It boggles the mind that even the possibility of reopening schools and tertiary education institutions can be considered at this stage, because in reality it will transgress everything that government - and specifically our Department of Health - have been instructing us not to do. It defies logic that on the one hand government insists on, and enforces, a strict ban of social gatherings, but then considers gathering our children and young people in educational facilities. MKMVA emphatically calls for this not to be allowed to happen. As parents and grandparents we greatly care for the education of our children, and for their future advancement, but the essential precondition for all of this is that their lives must be protected. We will do everything within our means to assist our children to study at home. Having already assisted them to do so up to now, we are aware that to study at home is not easy, but we are prepared to make the sacrifices to cope with these challenges. Instead of considering to open schools we urge our government to assist us as parents, and our children, to improve the conditions that will make distance, and online learning, easier. MKMVA calls on government to intervene with cellular network providers to drastically bring down the cost of data for all users, and specifically for learners and students. This we believe should be enforced by government to happen immediately, and for the rest of the duration of the lockdown. All educational websites and portals should be zero cost rated, and students must get free access, similar to what has already been done with regards to the government COVID19 website. While we appreciate what the SABC, as the public broadcaster, is doing to broadcast some classes on their open TV channels and radio stations, these should be expanded. We urge government to concentrate on implementing these, as the bare minimum emergency measures, in order to advance home schooling and online education, rather than considering the folly of reopening educational facilities at this inappropriately early stage. This is a time to pay special attention, and to take the required protective measures, to protect the young and the elderly who are always the most vulnerable in our society. In this regard it is a medical fact that the most vulnerable group for infection by the COVID19 virus, and to suffer fatalities, are people of advanced age. Our membership being elderly people, MKMVA is deeply concerned about their well-being. Many of our members are unemployed and live under terrible conditions, often they are not able to take care of themselves with regards to accommodation, adequate food and healthcare. It is a tragedy, and shame for our society, that liberation soldiers who have dedicated their lives to our liberation, are treated so badly. They deserve much better. MKMVA has raised these issues, and the continuing failure of the Department of Military Veterans (DMV) to adequately address them, consistently over years with our government. The current coronavirus pandemic, and the consequent lockdown, intensify the suffering and deprivation of many of our members manifold. This is truly a crisis. We urge the Department of Military Veterans not to procrastinate any further, and to take emergency measures to alleviate the suffering of our members. In this regard we will engage the Department of Military Veterans with concrete proposals for emergency relief. While short term emergency measures are required, the current crisis, as precipitated by the coronavirus pandemic, also highlights a much longer term malaise that must be addressed comprehensively once the current crisis has subsided. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-leader-1','ezslot_4',118,'0','0']));As with everything else in our society all of us must learn important lessons from the deep fault-lines, of inequality and grinding poverty, that have been further exposed and intensified by the coronavirus pandemic. Our world has changed forever, we simply cannot return to 'business as usual'. From hence-on we have to build a more inclusive, just and caring society. Failure do to so is truly not an option - this is essential for the very survival of humanity. Issued by Carl Niehaus, NEC Member of MKMVA and National Spokesperson, 28 April 2020