DA calls on Department of Agriculture to ensure regulations do not hamper food security 23 April 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0']));The Democratic Alliance (DA) is pleased to hear that the Minister of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development Thoko Didiza has finally admitted that the Covid-19 lockdown regulations for agricultural auctions are problematic and confusing. We are inundated with complaints and questions from farmers about auctions that were stopped by police for being against regulations. There are news reports about farmers being harassed by police, whether at roadblocks or auctions. As per our Smart Lockdown proposals, the DA believes livestock auctions should be allowed to continue. We propose that auctions should be permitted with only 100 people present following strict social distancing measures. The farming community should also look to use virtual bidding as an option to limit the number of people who gather. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0']));Regulations around auctions must be published immediately. As must guidelines around services that are essential to the agricultural sector. The Department of Agriculture surely has experts that understand how life on a farm works. Surely the Department has some sense that without the proper infrastructure, work grinds to a halt. Why is it then that farmers travelling to maintain infrastructure are stopped from doing so? When drafting regulations, the Department should consult with experts and take their advice on board. We have also heard of numerous instances where farmers with valid permits were forced to pay bribes in order to do their work because police officers claimed that they did not have the necessary permits to travel. The DA once again calls on the Department to open their offices to help with the issue of permits for farmers. This will ensure that they have the correct permits to travel and will alleviate extra stress in that regard. Minister Didza needs to urgently address these discrepancies in the regulations. The third week of the Covid-19 lockdown has come and gone, and still, there is no clarity for the agriculture sector. Most farmers charged with the vital service of food security does not qualify for financial aid during the crisis. And they are being actively hampered to perform their job and access relief. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));The deadline for farmers to apply for relief funding from the department was yesterday. The DA urges the Minister to re-open the process to countless farmers left in the lurch, to expand the relief effort to include farmers with a turnover up to R100 million and to ensure that all relevant farmers receive the necessary help. The agriculture sector has already been dealt devastating blows with the drought and foot and mouth disease earlier this year. The Department should not be an extra block around the neck. Issued byAnnette Steyn,DA Shadow Minister of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development, 23 April 2020