EFF calls on the African continent to reject the White Monopoly puppet Trevor Manuel as AU Envoy 13 April 2020 The EFF calls on the African continent to reject Ramaphosa's appointment of Trevor Manuel as Special Envoy of the African Union. In this role, Manuel is supposed to mobilize international support for Africa's efforts to address economic challenges faced by the continent during the spread of Covid19. Manuel is a puppet of White Monopoly Capital with no creative or genuine ideas of how to develop the continent. In his entire contribution in post-apartheid South Africa, Manuel has worked to entrench the power of white monopoly capital. The only support he will ever mobilize is that of his handlers; white monopoly power and its racist control of economic resources in the continent. Manuel has advocated for neo-colonial solutions that result in the benefit of multinational corporation at the expense of the poor. He has utterly failed to realize a developmental path that result in the eradication of equality, poverty and unemployment for black people. As investment envoy under Ramaphosa, he could never bring investments that yield millions of jobs anywhere. He will obviously now be export this failure and his neo-colonial macroeconomic policies to the rest of the continent. We know this because Manuel is part of the neoliberal ideological gang that engineered fruitless policies like GEAR, ASGI SA and NDP. Anyone who holds these policies in high esteem, which Manuel does, will not be useful to the continent. Underlying these policies is a stubborn refusal to believe the scientific fact that Foreign Direct Investments have never led to the development of any underdeveloped country in the entire history of world economies for the past three hundred years. FDI only leads to economic dependency on the West and white owned multinational companies. This is what Manuel represents and the sole reason the continent must reject him. Issued by Vuyani Pambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 13 April 2020