Mmusi Maimane Launches ‘One South Africa’ Movement with App 22 April 2020 20 April, South Africa; Mmusi Maimane’s ‘One South Africa’ movement (OSA) made history this week as the first South African political movement to launch with a digital application. “OSA has built a network across the continent with parties endorsing the movement firstly from IDU, which is a global association of parties such as the CDU in Germany, the Conservatives in London and MDC in Zimbabwe. We are building a pan African view that will seek to make Africa the biggest success story of the next decade,” says Maimane. In order to launch effectively and transparently, the use of technology was key - and an OSA mobile app, built by local SAAS and community app specialist development company PeppaComm, seemed an obvious choice to propel OSA forward. The end goal of the One South Africa movement (OSA) campaign app is of course to reach and engage with South African constituents in real-time, both effectively and transparently. “The launch of this digital platform comes at a critical time when all South Africans, beyond different racial, social and religious backgrounds, should be uniting in our effort to defeat COVID-19 and its devasting socio-economic effects. The digital platform will first and foremost be utilized to bring individuals, companies and communities together in finding solutions to the effects of COVID-19, including the Movement’s #TogetherWeCanWin campaign to source and distribute food packages and hand sanitizer to our most vulnerable communities,” says Maimane. The One South Africa movement app also features live news and manifesto updates, team and volunteer management, sponsorship, contributions and crowdfunding capabilities, powered with a social connection. “Political parties often battle to create a meaningful, direct connection with their prospective voters and communicate their manifestos clearly. There are 26,7 million registered voters, 17,6 million actual voters and 9 million non-voters in the country. There is a massive opportunity in this, and we need to give the people of South Africa a movement that they can trust in. The One South Africa Movement exists to partner with South Africans from all walks of life – community associations, NGOs, religious bodies and business - to fight for the dignity and the needs of the excluded and the marginalized, and in turn build a fair, more inclusive South Africa,” states Maimane. To register with One South Africa and find out more about the new movement, please download the One South Africa movement app from either the Google Play Store or the App store, search: One South Africa Movement. Issued by One South Africa, 22 April 2020