Top stories: Why Hero closed down by Herman Manson. A range of factors contributed to the full-service ad agency having had to close down after 25 years. By Invitation Only: Recession marketing is for the brave by Danni Dixon. What used to keep marketers awake at night is going to be replaced with the battle for growth with significantly less funds... It will down to the difference between marketers who follow and marketers who lead in times like this. By Invitation Only: How to grow in a covid-19 recession by Rita Doherty. Invest in marketing during a recession, so you can bounce back stronger. Here's some research to back this up. Q5: Brands, brands, brands, with Jeremy Sampson [interview] by Carey Finn. Speaking in his personal capacity, Jeremy Sampson weighs in on some of the biggest surprises and challenges for brands in South Africa, and globally, over 2019/2020. On the Radar:eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0'])); Declines in billings, forced wage cuts as lockdown bites — infographic Atmosphere appoints director The Radio Awards 2020 winners SA’s 53 One Show 2020 shortlisted entries #CoronavirusSA: eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_2',114,'0','0']));Adland responds to #covid19 • 14–17 Apr by MarkLives. Tracking South African and African brand and agency reactions and news, related to the covid-19 pandemic — free Loeries entries; free ads on Kagiso radio; Lockdown Collection. By Invitation Only: Customisation & agility's forced democratisation by Vikash Gajjar. A brand’s agility and adaptability to the current climate and the ‘new’ future will determine its success and longevity in a post-covid-19 world. An Accountant in Adland: Breakout [S2 E5] by Siwe Lawrence. With most of our 2020 strategies and resolutions rearranged to align to the movie set outside our homes, it definitely doesn’t feel like the 2020 we envisioned. By Invitation Only: Future-proof your agency — what clients will want now by Ann Nurock. When we eventually come out of this lockdown, consumers and brands will behave differently and agencies need to be ready to adjust to this different world. By Invitation Only: Brands in a state of lockdown by Elena Protulis. Sometimes, it’s ok to not say anything, to not be creative or tactical. Sometimes, people just want space to breathe and deal with the anxiety and the unknown in their own way. Become a MarkLives Member and help fund us, to serve you. Go to MarkLives.comfor breaking news, exclusive industry opinion, company news and jobs! Sign up now for the thrice-weekly MarkLives newsletter, including Ramify.biz headlines! Follow MarkLives on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, Pinterestand YouTube. Find an agency that matches your project needs! Ramify.biz — connecting marketers, agencies and service suppliers free of charge in South Africa, Namibia, Mauritius, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya, Nigeria, Tanzania and Uganda. Free listings and premium profiles available. 