Germany to start repatriation flights from South Africa 02.04.2020 - Article The German government will start repatriating German tourists from South Africa on Friday (3 April 2020). The repatriation planes are to be operated by South African Airways (SAA).eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0'])); “We are very happy that, in accordance with the rules by the South African government, we have found an agreement with South African Airways to organize the repatriation of remaining German tourists in South Africa. This is a joint effort, which sends a strong message of solidarity and cooperation during these trying times”, said German Ambassador Martin Schäfer. “For the coming days and weeks, we have an enormous logistical challenge ahead of us in order to get our compatriots home. We are grateful for the cooperation with the South African government. And we are glad to join forces with SAA as a reliable partner. We hope our compatriots will be back with their friends and families in Germany very soon.” Repatriation flights are set to start on Friday evening from both Johannesburg and Cape Town. The flights are targeted at German tourists who have been stranded in South Africa due to the lockdown and the cessation of commercial air traffic. The Embassy estimates that more than 5,000 German tourists are still in South Africa. The repatriation flights organized by the German government will also be open to citizens from other European Union member states. EU nationals are requested to contact their respective embassies.eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0'])); It has been agreed with South African authorities that all passengers will converge at a central assembly point, from where busses will take them to the airport. Only passengers not showing symptoms of the coronavirus will be allowed to travel aboard the flights. Screenings will be conducted before every flight’s departure. Travelers showing symptoms of the virus will be required to seek medical advice and treatment in South Africa and to strictly follow the rules on self-isolation/ quarantine imposed by the South African government. Statement issued by the German Mission in South Africa, 2 April 2020