As I write this, a patient is in a local Gauteng Hospital on a ventilator following a cardiac arrest, following a massive pulmonary embolus. He recently returned from overseas. When he arrived, he had a cough and phoned his doctor, who instructed him to be tested for Covid-19 before a consultation. The results were delayed for a few days. Before the patient received the results, which were negative, he had his pulmonary embolus, was admitted where he had a cardiac arrest with anoxic brain injury. This was an unintended, and unreported consequence of the Covid 19 pandemic. The law of intended consequences has been defined as “The actions of people, and especially of governments, always have effects that are unanticipated or unintended.” We must never forget that other diseases will continue during the pandemic. We will still have the hypertensives, the diabetics, the asthma attacks, and the many other conditions, although not urgent, when left untreated become debilitating chronic conditions, which often become difficult to treat. Diversion of resources to treat the pandemic may result in shortages in other areas such as funds for immunisation in children, routine follow-up for the many important conditions that foreshadow life-threatening events. During the 2014 West Africa Ebola epidemic, lack of routine care for malaria, HIV/AIDS, and tuberculosis led to an estimated 10,600 additional deaths in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone (Parpia and others 2016). This indirect death toll nearly equalled the 11,300 deaths directly caused by Ebola in those countries. Additionally, diversion of funds, medical resources, and personnel led to a 30 percent decrease in routine childhood immunization rates in affected countries. During the 2009 influenza pandemic, a greater surge in hospital admissions for influenza and pneumonia was associated with statistically significant increases in deaths attributable to acute myocardial infarction and stroke. A study in Guinea found that the Ebola outbreak led to a 31 percent decrease in outpatient visits for routine maternal and child health services. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_8',113,'0','0']));During the fear generated by the Covid-19, other diseases will progress. A recent report in the Lancet on the psychological impact of quarantine report on the negative effects including post-traumatic stress symptoms, confusion, and anger. Most people with depression will not commit suicide but major depression can lead to suicide attempts. We can expect an increase in malnutrition in the weeks ahead as the economy takes effect. Our country is in crisis mode; quite rightly, however my perception is that we are ignoring important aspects. There is a definite need for minimizing the spread of COVID-19 to vulnerable people. It is however important that we do not forget other very important health care priorities. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_9',114,'0','0']));Immunizations, perinatal visits, the care of diabetics, hypertensives and so many other diseases cannot be neglected. Screening for cancer, not an emergency but very important to pick up early, needs to be continued. Also important is the effect of the lockdown on mental health. Confinement, especially for single people, leads to depression, possible suicide, and certainly an increase in gender related violence. (reported in ENCA). The effect on the economy has been well discussed. The World Health Organization in a 2002 report stated: “Poverty kills more than disease”