KZN Health Department failed family of Covid-19 patient 7 April 2020 The Democratic Alliance in KwaZulu-Natal (KZN) today calls on the Health MEC Nomagugu-Simelane Zulu to hasten the process of screening and testing those who have been in contact with COVID-19 patients. This follows the Health Department only conducting tests on the family of the first Chatsworth man who tested positive for the Coronavirus at 1:30 pm yesterday - 21 hours after the diagnosis. The patient had been in contact with three family members. The patient was taken to R.K Khan Hospital after showing symptoms of the virus where the patient's nephew who accompanied him, informed the staff at the hospital that his uncle was a possible COVID-19 patient. Regardless of this information and the patient's symptoms, he was admitted to the casualty unit with people who were being treated for other illnesses. Lives of many, already sick patients were placed at risk. Of the three family members that were in contact with the patient, it is reported that one relative is a diabetic patient whom if infected could be at high risk. If the MEC is serious about combating the spread of the Coronavirus, she and her Department must urgently reconsider their measures and protocols. Now, more than ever, the department needs to pull up their socks as millions of KZN residents are depending on it. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_4',115,'0','0']));We further commend the SAPS in Chatsworth who, when they received the news, closed the area and ensured that the family was isolated from the community. If we are to beat this virus, the DoH should follow suit by putting in place all the necessary measures. Our province has the majority of COVID-19 deaths so far. The MEC must, therefore, fast-track the screening of family members who have been in contact with COVID-19 positive patients. The KZN DoH should be held responsible for creating unnecessary panic by not doing what they are trusted to do. Relatives of the patient who has since been transferred to Greys Hospital in PMB, are living in fear not knowing whether or not they were infected. The fight against the Coronavirus Pandemic needs us to work hand-in-hand, therefore we are urging residents to adhere to the government’s regulations which are going to assist us to overcome this pandemic. Stay At Home. Issuedby Mergan Chetty, DA KZN Deputy Leader, 7 April 2020