DA calls for urgent investigation into alleged Port Nolloth SAPS shooting 21 April 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in the Northern Cape is calling for a full investigation into the alleged shooting of a civilian by a police officer in Port Nolloth on Sunday, as well as for the precautionary suspension of the police officer in question. While the circumstances surrounding the incident are not clear, it has been reported that a 22-year old man, who claimed to be fetching food supplies from a family member, was allegedly shot by a police officer. It is alleged that the man ran away after being stopped and told to go home, whereby the police officer opened fire on the man. The man is believed to be recovering in hospital while the police officer is apparently still patrolling the streets. The DA is deeply disturbed by the report. We understand that members of the South African Police Service (SAPS) have their hands full trying to enforce lockdown regulations and that not all citizens are complying, making their jobs more difficult. We agree that those who flout the regulations must be punished according to the law, however, the use of excessive force, which could claim lives, is unacceptable. The latest incident supports increasing evidence that reckless comments made by Police Minister Bheki Cele over the lockdown period, have emboldened SAPS members to act outside of the law. This kind of behavior is setting a dangerous precedent, which if not addressed now, could end in much tragedy later. SAPS needs to urgently reboot and revert to the message given to them by President Cyril Ramaphosa, who emphasized that while lockdown offenders must be punished, police officers must also act with compassion and understanding, and be driven by a notion to save lives - in other words not take lives. The DA has requested IPID to launch an urgent investigation into this incident, also taking into consideration the impact of past comments made by Minister Cele on the actions of the officer in question. At the same time, we are calling on Northern Cape Police Commissioner, RisimatiShivuri, to ensure that the police officer in question is placed on precautionary suspension and that his firearm is confiscated. We do not know the situation of the police officer in question, nor the levels of stress that he may be under. The community should be protected from him at this time. At the same time, the officer should also be protected from himself and be made to undergo psychological evaluation and counselling. The DA encourages all citizens to abide by lockdown regulations and to support our police officers, who like all our other essential services, are working under very trying circumstances and risking their own lives to save ours. It would, however, be a tragedy for someone to survive Coronavirus, only to have their lives taken by police brutality. Issued by OfentseMokae,DA Northern Cape Provincial Spokesperson on Transport, Safety & Liaison, 21 April 2020