Proposals made by Democratic Alliance in respect of the possible reopening of Schools and Post-school institutions during the Covid19 pandemic 23 April 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0']));The DA is concerned about the loss of teaching time resulting from the Covid19 pandemic, and believes that every effort must be made to save the teaching year. Students and learners and their families, plus the state itself, stand to lose an enormous amount in time and money if this is not achieved and students and learners will not be able to progress to the next level (particularly in the case of those graduating from one kind of institution to another) resulting in the emptying of institutions at some levels and overcrowding at others. The closing of schools has resulted in one particular kind of hardship – hunger amongst schoolchildren normally reliant on school feeding for their nutritional needs. We believe that until the lockdown is softened, it is vital that, as in the Western Cape, school feeding schemes are continued, under carefully monitored hygienic and social distancing conditions. In the Western Cape both the Police and City Councils are assisting with ensuring that feeding takes place safely. This should happen elsewhere as well. We believe that it is time that serious consideration be given to the lifting of the lockdown. There is much planning to be done in this respect, at all levels of the education system, and there are many factors to be considered. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0']));We suggest that in due course there must be a gradual re-opening of schools, as guided, of course, by Health concerns. There also needs to be a full assessment of where pre-schooling fits into the reopening plan. Over and above the general rules, a protocol must be developed by the Dept to determine when and why each individual school may open or close in difficult situations (say if a number of pupils get ill) to prevent the ad hoc closure of schools if and when infection is discovered. And finally, we are convinced that there must be a gradual re-opening of Universities and Colleges as well. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));The year probably cannot be saved for Matrics, Grade 7s and Final Year students if the reopening is later than June, so we need to put a date on our ideal partial re-opening. Our suggested date is the beginning of June. We think that Matrics and final year students MUST return by this date if their year is to be saved. If the year cannot be saved, which should become clear during May, a contingency plan should be put in place In the post-school sector, the year could be prolonged (this seems to have been ruled out in schools). It is certainly being thought about in Universities. If this happens, additional budget will be required for additional NSFAS support for students, as well as additional tutors and lecturers. We estimate that as much as R3.5bn might be needed. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_5',115,'0','0']));If and when the reopening occurs, it should take place in a PHASED manner. In schools, we would presumably have to follow the DBE’s guidelines, which suggest the first month would be for Matrics and Grade 7s, the second for Grs 11 and 6, and so on down the years. We also believe that the early re-opening of schools should include Grades R, 1 and 2. At Universities and Colleges this seems logical too – in the first month: final years, postgraduates and laboratory-based/practical courses would attend. In the second month, the year below that would join them. And so on down the years. In the case of SETA funded courses, those requiring a practical component and based in businesses should re-start when the businesses themselves open up. We also suggest that the children of essential workers be able to attend open schools where necessary. The need for careful daily screening is something both schools and post-school institutions will have in common. Western Cape schools are acquiring thermometers for all schools. We recommend that other Provinces and Higher Education as a whole should follow this example For Higher Education we also propose that testing facilities be made available on campuses, using “Higher Health” campus health clinics and possibly other medical facilities which some Universities have. Mobile testing facilities should be provided across the board to Colleges and possibly schools. Social distancing must be enforced in the first phases of re-opening. With fewer learners/students in institutions, there will be space to undertake this. Masks should be compulsory for all learners, teachers, students and lecturers eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-banner-1','ezslot_6',116,'0','0']));Rigorous hygiene should be enforced at all types of institution including the sterilization of buildings/classrooms/ablution facilities and so on. Liquid soap should be made widely available. Persons entering the premises should sanitise upon entry, and entry itself should be strictly limited and controlled. Very specific measures need to be taken to ensure social distancing, hygiene, screening and possible quarantining in school hostels and University and College residences and off campus accommodation. Once partial reopening has taken place, attention should be paid at all levels to the psychosocial issues arising from the entire epidemic, amongst learners, teachers, students and lecturers. The evolving focus on online teaching. Online teaching is developing fast at all levels of the educational system as the epidemic grows and need for education continues. The Western Cape is doing an enormous amount to promote this at schools and we advocate that the National Department follows our example. Much is being done at Universities and Colleges as well. But there are serious problems with online teaching as the sole means of instruction: It cannot be universal and the resulting inequality between rich and poor people and institutions needs to be addressed; our blended learning approach and our ideas in the table below would help in this respect Full-on online teaching is educationally not as sound as “blended” learning, which includes elements of the online and the face-to-face. We are strong advocates of this over the long term eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-leader-1','ezslot_4',118,'0','0']));The Gazetted requirement that all educational content should be zero rated has not yet been implemented. This needs to be urgently addressed. The following are the practical suggestions that we are making at all levels of the educational system for enhancing access to online teaching. These are in addition to the many practical measures already being proposed and implemented by government The use of libraries and community halls as points of access to IT facilities for the “electronically disadvantaged” The development and use of Provincial e-learning portals along the lines already developed in the Western Cape The establishment of “banks” of computers for loan to students, using their fee account as the surety The development of systematic partnerships with other Departments of Government (Communications etc) to ensure a “whole of society” approach to online teaching Recommending to learners the use of phone sim-cards for access to the Vodacom e-school The possible use of ‘wi-fi trucks” to act as hotspots for particular areas Where online teaching cannot be organized, course content may need to be printed or put on data-sticks and delivered to learners – again here the Western Cape provides a model for other Provinces We are in full support of the many initiatives already under way in schools, Universities and Colleges. We seek to present ideas that can enhance these, and also to encourage forward thinking to the time when the Covid pandemic will start easing. Issued by Belinda Bozzoli, DA Shadow Minister for Higher Education, Science and Technology and NomsaMarchesi, DA Shadow Minister for Basic Education, 23 April 2020