Employers not adhering to measures put in place to stem COVID-19 during lockdown will face shut down  The Department of Employment and Labour blitz inspections in Standerton,  Mpumalanga Province, led to the closure of  Pax Agricultural Primary Co-operation Limited.  The employer was found not complying with occupational health and safety (OHS) Act  standards, and not adhering to Covid-19 regulations. The blitz  inspections were triggered by a number of anonymous complaints which were reported to the Department. The inspection found that, the employer failed to conduct risk assessment in order to implement precautionary measures to prevent the spread of the Coronavirus (Covid-19). Among other findings, employees were not trained on the precautionary measures to be taken in order to protect themselves against any harm to their well-being, particularly on the risks caused by exposure to hazardous biological agents like Covid-19. Employees were provided with neither sanitisers nor water and soap for  basic personal hygiene, and  were not furnished with personal protective equipment as per the OHS standards. Mpumalanga Chief Director: Provincial Operations Margaret Mazibuko, said “readiness from the side of the employer to deal with Covid-19, and to protect workers was non-existent.”  As a result, the employer was served with a prohibition notice and will remain closed until measures in line with Covid-19 guidelines from the Department of Health are put in place. Immediate prosecution was recommended by the inspector  and a criminal case was opened with the South African Police Service in Standerton, after the employer illegally conducted business in a prohibited place. During the inspections, one Inspector was assaulted by a farm owner in Charl Cilliers, and an assault case has been opened with the South African Police in Standerton. Other workplaces visited were Albany Bakery in Secunda where the employer was not compliant and also not observing the precautionary measures of distance. Spar Carolina  and OK Value market in Middleburg were found to be compliant and had sanitisers for both employees and clients. There was also control of the number of clients inside the shop and the employees at till points were provided with masks. Mazibuko said due to a high number of queries and complaints that the province is receiving on non-compliant employers, the province will unleash more blitz inspections from the week of  6  -10 April around Malelane and Komatipoort areas, with specific  focus on the agriculture and retail sectors. Issued by Cindy Mazibuko, Chief Director Provincial Operations: Mpumalanga Province, Department of Employment and Labour, 2 April 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0'])); 