DA calls on Tshwane Administrator to work with NGOs to ensure the safety of the homeless during the lockdown period 1 April 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in Gauteng is calling on the new Tshwane Administrator to accept assistance offered by the local NGOs to ensure the safety of Tshwane’s homeless people during the national lockdown period. We have been reliably informed that the City of Tshwane has refused assistance from the local NGOs to assist the homeless. These NGOs who have offered to assist the City are rendering social services to the homeless community in Tshwane. The City has accused these NGOs of sabotage and of interfering with their work which is not the case. The City alone will not able to render adequate services to the homeless hence there is a need for a strong partnership with NGOs. It is unacceptable for the City to refuse assistance from NGOs while it does not have enough capacity and resources to render much needed services to the homeless. NGOs are playing a crucial role in the lives of the homeless people by ensuring that they are fed, clothed and provided with proper shelters. Furthermore, it is alleged that these NGOs have submitted proposals to the City of Tshwane to assist with alternative venues and catering for the homeless, but these proposals were rejected and the contracts were issued to questionable suppliers to render such services. The City is currently taking all homeless people to Caledonian Stadium which is now overcrowded with more than 2000 people. There is not enough food and tents to ensure that social distancing can be maintained. The law enforcement agencies are also forcefully removing homeless people from various parts of the City which goes against the directive issued by MEC Lesufi last week. The DA calls on the Gauteng Acting MEC for Social Development, Panyaza Lesufi to intervene and ensure that there is a smooth partnership between the City of Tshwane and the NGOs. We remain committed to supporting both government and NGOs’ efforts in curbing the spread of this deadly Covid-19 virus. Issued by Crezane Bosch,DA Gauteng Spokesperson for Social Development, 1 April 2020