ECONOMIC FREEDOM FIGHTERS STATEMENT ON THE PHASES AND RELAXATION OF LOCKDOWN REGULATIONS ANNOUNCED BY PRESIDENT CYRIL RAMAPHOSA Thursday, 23 April 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0']));The Economic Freedom Fighters notes the announcement of the Government to begin processes of relaxation of Lockdown regulations that are in place to contain the rapid spread of COVID-19. We are limited from making substantial remarks on the announcement because the substantial issues which the President announced will begin on the 1st of May 2020 will only be announced by Ministers over the coming weeks. In his address, the President said that other measures and businesses that will be permitted to operate from the 1st of May will be decided and announced by Ministers during the course of the week. We strongly caution against a re-opening of the economy that is not based on a sound scientific and epidemiological basis. When the Minister of Health called in experts to address the nation on the spread of the virus, they strongly advised against re-opening the economy when daily infections are still above 45. In the past 24 hours, South Africa has witnessed more than 300 daily cases and we, therefore, do not understand the reasons for premature re-opening, which ignores the scientific and logical advice of experts. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0']));We strongly caution against the premature re-opening of economic sectors that require multitudes of employees to be in contact with each other or be in the same place because this will certainly expose them to higher risks of contracting the virus. The government should not bend at the altar of capitalist greed because the measures put in place thus far will be reversed in a short period of time. Once again, the EFF is concerned that in all these announcements, the President is not providing any guidance on what should happen to the school and academic calendar at primary, secondary, and post-secondary levels. Without premature re-opening of schools, colleges, universities of technology, and universities, the government must present a clear and well-funded plan on how South Africa should complete the 2020 school and academic year without exposing learners and students to the danger of COVID-19. We call for a comprehensive and implementable plan on education and these should be centrally coordinated and funded by the national government. We are aware that individual institutions of higher learning, notably Wits University, University of Johannesburg, and the University of Cape Town are putting in place mechanisms to continue with the academic year using communications technology. We demand that the Government should intervene to assist all Universities of Technology and Universities to build immediate capacities to reach and assess students under lockdown. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));Concerning the details of the businesses that will be permitted to operate by Ministers, the EFF strongly cautions that the government should not subject our people to the danger of COVID-19. We call on all our people to cooperate with the members of the South African National Defence Force who are deployed to provide critical services in our communities. We believe that the provision of water and healthcare services should not be a temporary measure but institutionalised in a manner that will continue to provide these basic services even after the containment of COVID-19. Statement issued by Vuyani Pambo, EFF national spokesperson, 23 April 2020