ANC Midvaal councillor charges poor residents R3 to 'apply' for food parcels 20 April 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_2',112,'0','0']));The Democratic Alliance (DA) has been reliably informed that ANC Ward 6 Midvaal Local Municipality Councillor, Paseka Johannes Mabaso and his team have allegedly been going door to door collecting details of the people in need of food parcels and charging each household R3. It is alleged that Councillor Mabaso claims that the R3 is for buying data to be used to submit the food parcel request via email to the Gauteng Department of Social Development. This ward has approximately 7645 households. If the councillor and his team had covered the entire ward collecting their personal details and R3 each, this could amount to R22 935.00. It is a disgrace that Councilor Mabaso is allegedly stealing from the poor who are in desperate need of food while councillors are provided with laptops, cellphones and allowances for data to assist the residents. Furthermore, there are also allegations that in Sebokeng Ward 28 the residents are made to complete and sign ANC membership forms in order for them to receive food parcels. The residents are also being told that they must vote for the current ANC councillor for a second term next year in the 2021 Local government elections. These allegations are serious and point to the exploitation of the poor by the ANC during this critical period. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_4',114,'0','0']));The fact that the department has also shut down its call centre because it was inundated with calls and requests for food parcels from hungry citizens has created loopholes for corrupt councillors to steal money from the poor. The DA will be opening a case of fraud and corruption against Councillor Mabaso at the local police station in the area. We also call on the Acting Gauteng MEC for Social Development, Panyaza Lesufi to urgently investigate these allegations and ensure that the food parcels reach the needy without considering political affiliations. Issued by RefiloeNt’sekhe, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Social Development, 20 April 2020