Covid-19 social relief must benefit the most vulnerable 14 April 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in the Northern Cape is deeply concerned by the blatant politicization of social relief in the province and we are calling on Premier Zamani Saul to urgently speak out against the biased distribution of food parcels. This comes as the social relief distribution plan for the Northern Cape has largely been hijacked by the ANC. Sol Plaatje municipality is a case in point. While we might have understood if just the Members of the Executive Council (MECs) were participating in the Sol Plaatje distribution programme, the deployment of ANC politicians goes beyond provincial government leaders and includes ANC Members of Parliament (MPs) and Members of the Provincial Legislature (MPLs). At the same time, it completely excludes MPs and MPLs from opposition parties. In addition to this, there is an utter lack of transparency with regards to the identified beneficiaries on the lists, that are being withheld from opposition councillors. eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_7',113,'0','0']));eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_8',113,'0','1']));There are many other similarly disturbing reports. In Umsobomvu municipality, there are reports of councillors dishing out food parcels to their friends and family. The food parcels, meant for the most vulnerable of society, are also being handed out by people wearing ANC t-shirts to ANC supporters. Meanwhile, in areas like Prieska, there is no cooperation between SASSA, the Department of Social Development, other organisations and civil society in terms of coordinating the distribution of relief. In effect, there is duplication at some households, while others, often the most vulnerable, receive nothing at all. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_11',114,'0','0']));The only obvious conclusion that we can draw is that the ANC is using the Covid-19 pandemic as an opportunity to score political points and further its own agenda. This not only blurs the lines between the party and state, not least of all the Department of Social Development, but it is also unethical and completely unacceptable. The Coronavirus and hunger do not discriminate and nor should the ANC or the government, which is the only safety net for thousands who have been left jobless and penniless. Surely, if this global emergency has taught us anything, it should be that that we have broken this world with our greed, our selfishness, our desire for power, our hatred of each other and our immorality. If the human race is to survive, God willing, we all need to change our ways and strive for goodness, fairness and Godliness. This includes cancelling out corruption and the abuse of power for political gain and if the ANC still cannot see this, then God help us all. The DA appeals to Premier Saul to take leadership in terms of the essential social relief programme by showing that the 6th administration is a government for all the people of the Northern Cape and not just for ANC cadres. In this regard, the constitution of the municipal distribution teams must be urgently revised. Distribution teams should either include no MPs and MPLs or alternatively MPs and MPLs from all political parties. At the same time, the Social Development Department should play a greater role in ensuring that those most in need have access to food parcels and that food parcels are distributed with the utmost care, fairness and transparency to best serve the needs of all vulnerable citizens. It is also critical that all efforts are ultimately coordinated from a single platform to ensure that social relief is distributed as efficiently and effectively as possible. All people of the Northern Cape, and not just card-carrying members of the ANC, deserve a fighting chance to overcome starvation by having their basic needs met by government during this time of crisis. Issued by Andrew Louw,DA Northern Cape Provincial Leader, 14 April 2020