DA concerned about failure to enforce lockdown in North West 1 April 2020 Note to Editors: Kindly find attached soundbites in English and Afrikaans by DA North West Spokesperson on Health and Social Development, Gavin Edwards. Pictures can be found here, here, and here The Democratic Alliance in North West is concerned about the failure by the SAPS and SANDF to enforce the 21-day lockdown, announced by President Ramaphosa on 23 March 2020, in the majority of towns and rural communities in the province. While the lack of the SAPS and SANDF presence in communities of Potchefstroom, Rustenburg, Zeerust, Schweizer-Reneke, Mafikeng and Stilfontein is concerning, the failure of law enforcement defeats the objective of this very important lockdown, which is to flatten the curve of infection. It is regrettable to find that Central Business Districts (CBDs) of these towns are going about its business as usual in the midst of a life-threatening pandemic. See pictures of Zeerust CBD here, here and here. People are seen queuing in long lines at shops with no safe distance between them. What is even more alarming, is the fact that the SAPS and SANDF are nowhere to be seen in areas where the guidelines and regulations of the lockdown are being ignored. In some areas, police patrols drive by, seemingly not noticing the groups of people and even children, roaming the streets of CBDs and residential areas. The lockdown was instituted to protect citizens against the spread of the highly contagious Coronavirus. If social distancing is not adhered to, the number of infections will rise which may result in a longer lockdown period. This virus does not discriminate – anyone can be infected regardless of race, gender or age. To this end, we will write to the MEC for Department of Health, Madoda Sambatha, requesting him to do more in terms of awareness of this deadly disease, especially in rural communities where access to information on this virus is limited. We will also write to Premier Mokgoro and the Provincial Commissioner of SAPS, Lieutenant General SJ Kwena, requesting them to ensure the safety of every citizen by the effective enforcement of the lockdown regulations. According to the latest statistics, 8 people have been diagnosed with the Coronavirus in the North West with no deaths reported thus far. We plead with the people of North West to give their full cooperation during this lockdown period in order to limit the spread of the virus and also to prevent the possible extension of the lockdown period. Anyone experiencing flu-like symptoms is encouraged to contact a doctor or visit their local hospital. Contact the National Department of Health 24-hour information hotline on 0800 029 999 for any further information. The DA will continue to monitor the behaviour of the SAPS and SANDF in the province and we will continue to engage communities urging them to adhere to the lockdown regulations. Together we can flatten the curve Issued by Gavin Edwards, DA North West Spokesperson on Health and Social Development, 1 April 2020