Police Committee seeks urgent statistics from IPID 9 April 2020 The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Ms Tina Joemat-Pettersson, has asked for a detailed analysis of the incidents and statistics relating to the investigations the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (IPID) has undertaken from January to March 2020. This is in light of concerning reports of murders and assault cases against the police since the commencement of a lockdown, which was declared by President Cyril Ramaphosa. The committee has always maintained that the enforcement of the state of national disaster regulations should be done within the confines of the Constitution. “We align ourselves with our President when he gave his marching orders to the SANDF (South African National Defence Force) and the SAPS (South African Police Service) on the evening of 26 March 2020, when he said: ‘Do it in such a way that we do not violate the rights of our people either intentionally or unintentionally. Let us execute our task with respect. I want, after this mission, the people of our country to see you as the South African National Defence Force and the South African Police Service, and know that you are the best in the world in that you were supportive of them and given them the assurance and assisted in every way you could’.”eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0'])); As part of its constitutional obligation of oversight, the committee has requested those statistics to ensure that those cases are investigated and that those found in the wrong are prosecuted. The committee will do an expert analysis on the IPID statistics and discuss them in its next meeting. As part of this commitment to oversight over policing, the Chairperson received a request for a meeting from a member of the DA (Democratic Alliance) in the committee. The DA was the only political party that indicated its availability. The National Freedom Party was also available, but is an alternate member of the committee. The rest of the political parties including the African National Congress (ANC), IFP (Inkatha Freedom Party) and EFF (Economic Freedom Fighters) were unavailable because of constituency work, and the Freedom Front Plus did not respond to the request. The unavailability of the ANC, EFF and IFP members of the committee had an impact on the feasibility of the meeting and the meeting couldn’t quorate as a result. The committee views the matter as urgent and will place it on the agenda for the first meeting when it reconvenes.eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0'])); The committee has urged the police to continue enforcing the declaration within the confines of the law as directed by the President. The committee continues to support the Minister and government in general in the lockdown efforts. Issued by Malatswa Molepo, Media Officer, Parliamentary Communication Services, 9 April 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_4',115,'0','0']));