MKMVA welcomes the decision of government not to lift the ban on the sale of cigarettes and once again calls for schools and education facilities not to be reopened at this stage 30 April 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0']));The Umkhonto we Sizwe Military Veterans Association (MKMVA) warmly welcomes the annoucement by our democratic government that the earlier decision to resume with the sale of cigarettes, has been rescinded. As we have stated in our media statement of Tuesday, the 28th of April 2020: "The coronavirus being a respiratory disease, smoking directly impacts on the ability of our immune system to resist infection, and once infected our ability to fight the disease". We laud our government for having paid heed to the concerns that were expressed by many South Africans, NGO's, and various political and health organisations. It is highly appreciated that our government called for comments from our people about how we would like to see the gradual lifting of the lockdown administered, and took those comments seriously, and tried as far as possible to accommodate them. This is what democracy is all about, and what a sensitive and listening government ought to do. MKMVA is proud of our ANC comrades in government who are staying true to the principle of being a government by the people for the people. In this context we call on our government to please also listen to the voices of concern from many in our nation - especially from deeply concerned parents - that it is too early to re-open our schools, and other educational facilities. We have noted the briefing by the Department of Basic Education yesterday, about the proposed plans to reopen schools, and we are deeply concerned that these do not adequately address our concerns. It is worth to again reiterate what we have said in our statement of the 28th of April: "We urgeour government to resist the temptation to reopen schools and tertiary education facilities at this, still very unstable and precarious stage, in the battle to contain the spread of the coronavirus. These education facilities are by their very nature places where large numbers of young people gather. Class rooms are overcrowded... Under such conditions social distancing will not be possible, and to put a burden on teachers to enforce the impossible will be most unfair." eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0']));MKMVA welcomes the position of the ANC that it is too early to re-open schools, as it was articulated yesterday by the Deputy Secretary General of the ANC, comrade Jessie Duarte. We fully concur with comrade Duarte that more thinking and strategizing were neededbefore government could reopen schools, and that saving lives is more important than rushing to reopen schools. We therefore call on our government in the spirit of comradely persuasion - specifically the Department of Basic Education - to listen to the many concerns that have been raised, to reconsider the proposed plans to reopen schools, and not to proceed with these plans at this stage. MKMVA is acutely aware that the phased gradual lifting of the lockdown is a complicated process, and that government has to make many difficult decisions. As caring and sensitive as our government is to the needs, and views, of our people it will never be possible to please everyone. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));Once all options and views have been considered, it is important that we must heed the final decisions of our government. As we have urged before, now is the time for a spirit of compliance, not for defiance. MKMVA calls on every South African to carefully acquaint themselves with what all the regulations of Stage 4 of the lockdown entail, and to fully comply. Ultimately it is our civil duty to protect ourselves, and our whole nation. Let us continue to stay at home, maintain social distancing, and save lives. Issued by Carl Niehaus, NEC Member of MKMVA and National Spokesperson, 30 April 2020