Matsoho a Hlatswana – Hands Wash Each Other 6 April 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0']));The novel coronavirus (Covid-19) Command Council led by President Cyril Ramaphosa is providing an interesting state-led campaigning approach to tackle the most difficult challenge we face today. The approach cuts across the boundaries of government departments, spheres of government and other state entities in a targeted and exemplary manner. Certainly this style of work and innovation can be improved, such as by harnessing the self-organising initiatives on the ground to address creatively the many different economic and social impacts of the pandemic. It is critical to include medium- and long-term considerations in addressing the immediate effects of the pandemic. Below is what could be an interesting, albeit brief, look at how others have thought about doing work in areas that cut across different disciplines, fields and faculties, and on learning from our past mistakes as we go along. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0']));Plagues of bygone years were defeated not by the medical sector alone per se, but also by work done in other sectors, for example, by engineers providing critical infrastructure, making clean water available, building roads and bridges. This view is according to the enthusiastic and passionate Professor Harry Seftel, in an edition of Needs and Numbers, an engineering publication edited by Allyson Lawless, an engineer dedicated and an equally a passionate builder in her sector. The implicit humility of this perspective is fascinating and attractive – an acknowledgement of the role of another discipline, from the standpoint of a field one is eminently an authority in. In The Creative City, similarly, Charles Laundry argues that the cities’ problems are now so complex that they cannot yield to solutions by engineers and planners alone, but, effectively, by a wide range of inputs from other professions, including environmentalists, lawyers, architects, historians, public health specialists and others. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));In more or less the same vein Thomas Pickety, in his book Capital in the Twenty-First Century, says one lesson he learnt in writing the history of inequality was how critically interconnected different disciplines were to researching his book. He now believes these are interdependent, interconnected and not delinked, separate, the way they are still being treated by many today. The new technologies, we are told as well, are themselves collapsing boundaries that ‘exist’ between disciplines. The ‘stubborn’ maintenance of these boundaries, especially in academia, is likely to lose its value even more, given the interconnectedness of the solutions, not just to Covid-19, but also addressing our many other social, economic and political challenges. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_4',115,'0','0']));Ben Turok, in his book With My Head Above The Parapet, says ‘To create a developmental state that is vigorous and interventionist, but also participatory and humane, will take a great deal of determination. There are few signs of this at present. What we have are empty references to “people-centred and people-driven” programmes, with only token mechanism of implementation and scant practice of the kind of community involvement that is a pre requisite for sustainable development’. Interestingly, decrying our failure to learn from our mistakes, Atul Gawande, an Indian-American surgeon published a fascinating book titled The Checklist Manifesto. In it, he does not only reflect on the medical field in which he is based, but also on these phenomena in the construction and financial sectors. In all these sectors collaboration came to signify the best modus operandi, aided by a simple checklist. Every step of the way, appropriate input was made by different ‘experts’ from different disciplines. So the checklist was used to ensure that the problems being addressed did not occur again. This was, he says, in contrast to past practices of surgeons acting as ‘super egos’ who lorded over every professional relevant to surgery. In construction it signified the collapse of the master builder who was then in charge of all aspects of construction to the exclusion, similarly, of other professionals. Teams that were so constituted and played their roles together had the best prospects for success, we are told. In other words, the recognition of the value of learning from our past mistakes and from others, of diversity, of openness, and applying different lenses to look at problems and opportunities, is critical to mounting a successful campaign against Covid-19 and other economic and social challenges. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-banner-1','ezslot_5',116,'0','0']));It sounds that in birds that fly together each one that leads the pack at different phases of the journey has important lessons for us because of our diversity and the complex environment in which we live. The Covid-19 pandemic, like plagues and others before it, can be defeated if we deliberately learn from our past mistakes. Birds build their nests using the feathers of other birds. Learning from China, Cuba and elsewhere is critical. The campaign against Covid-19 led by President Cyril Ramaphosa, co-ordinating the state, civil society broadly and the nation is the way to go to address poverty, unemployment, inequality and other challenges. eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-large-leaderboard-2','ezslot_7',117,'0','0']));The people’s focus should be on the agenda all the time. It is also important to work with our neighbours, the continent and world and share experiences. This virus, like others, knows no boundaries, nor respects any. Internationalism is the hallmark of our freedom. Humility, learning from Seftel, appears to be the oil that enables the wheels of co-operation and collaboration to turn smoothly and effectively. If Covid-19 shows us anything, it is the interconnectedness of the world we live in. We either sink or swim together! Cde Lechesa Tsenoli is a Member of the SACP Central Committee, and also serves as the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly in Parliament This article first appeared in the SACP's online journal, Umsebenzi Online.