Covid-19: DA calls for increased information and transparency from KZN Health Department 6 April 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) today calls for increased information and transparency by KwaZulu-Natal’s Department of Health (DoH) around Covid-19. The move follows a high number of complaints from the public regarding the lack of information on Covid-19 community testing, hospital readiness for patients’ concurrent medical conditions and testing of Persons Under Investigation (PIU’s) in health facilities. The grievances raised with the DA include information from both patient and health professionals about proper isolation procedures not being followed when it comes to taking samples from PIU’s at the Phoenix Community Health Clinic, Khan Hospital and Inkosi Albert Luthuli Hospital. In some cases, samples were allegedly taken in front of other non-PUI patients who were in the same facilities. To add to this, no masks were provided. Similarly, the DA has also been advised that some health personnel performing the tests were doing so without the requisite Personal Protective Equipment (PPE). The DA is extremely concerned by these reports. We have forwarded these complaints to KZN Health MEC, Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu and her Department for urgent investigation and remediation. In addition to the concerns raised within these facilities, the DA’s public representatives across the province are also receiving numerous queries regarding this week's roll out of Covid-19 community testing. Of particular concern to many citizens are the incidents of crime related to fake testers. Communities, especially the elderly, are terrified - not just of Covid-19 infection but of becoming victims of crime. Yet another concern is the limited information on tracing of contacts of confirmed cases and patients treated at St Augustine’s Hospital. Many affected contacts have not yet been tested by the National Institute of Communicable Diseases (NICD) and the Department’s teams. KZN’s fight against Covid-19 should be transparent with a regular flow of information from the province’s Health MEC and her Department to public representatives and communities. The DA therefore welcomes the urgent virtual Health Portfolio Committee meeting, called by Chairperson NomakikiMajola, which is scheduled to take place tomorrow, Tuesday 7 April. We will use this opportunity to get answers from the MEC on the issues raised by the public. We will also request a detailed plan on testing, tracing and treatment for the province. Transparency and information are some of the biggest weapons against the spread of Coronavirus. The DA again calls on the people of South African to stay at home, self-isolate and avoid unnecessary travel. We continue to commend the thousands of dedicated health professionals treating patients under extremely difficult conditions in our public facilities. Together we will defeat this virus and maintain a healthy society. Issued by Rishigen Viranna, DA KZN Spokesperson on Health, 6 April 2020