Lockdown extension tougher for President Ramaphosa 15 April 2020 South Africa’s extended two-week lockdown announced prior to the Easter weekend by President Ramaphosa is likely to prove somewhat more difficult to manage than the initial three-week period. The first 21-days was almost universally praised for both for its practical necessity in ‘flattening the curve’ but also for the decisiveness and commitment shown by Cyril Ramaphosa, Zweli Mkhize and the broader machinery of the state. In particular, PresidentRamaphosa was able to use the Covid-19 crisis to re-invigorate his hitherto lacklustre leadership through a statesman-like demeanour and a universally praised communications effort that reaffirmed what had been somewhat wavering support for him. Notwithstanding the acceptance (and necessity) of the almost inevitable exertion of the lockdown, the prolonged Groundhog-Day sensation of the routine of a total disruption to the rituals of normal life are likely to take their toll as we move towards the end of April and a possibly review of lockdown rules. After 35 days of lockdown, South Africans will likely to experiencing their upper limit of tolerance for a continuous lockdown. The first three weeks resulted in an unprecedented amount of social compact with a commendable buy-in to the view that the sacrifice was essential for the national good whatever the economic and personal-freedom consequences. However, the reality of the sacrifice – if it hasn’t set in already – is likely to be felt within the extension period. For many, surviving a few weeks has been tolerable. But once real jobs start to disappear as furloughs turn into dismissals, wages begin to dry-up or drop and entrepreneurial opportunities shrink further, the psychological and emotional effects will become more real. The business cycle can withstand a few weeks of disruption, but the inability to pay fixed-cost overheads will begin hurting over the next week. When rental collections are suspended as tenants refuse (or are simply unable) to pay, the chain of the economic pipeline will soon unravel. When dividends payable by public companies are suspended, the effects on pension-fund performances as a retirement security will be under immense strain. These issues are now likely to be more prevalent than in the first 21 days. And that poses not only an economic dilemma for the President but also a political and security dilemma for the ANC and the State. Five weeks of lockdown are likely to stretch the tolerance of citizens who are unnaturally confined to their homes and prevented from more regular activities. Already, we have seen liquor stores looted, illicit tobacco dealings back in action and abandoned schools vandalised. Crime therefore is mutating as the lockdown creates new avenues for offences. But the real threat is in the conduct of the security forces who themselves face an extended period of having to enforce the lockdown in both a strain for them and for the communities in which they operate. Almost daily charges of policing excesses can also erode confidence in the state and its key institutions of law-and-order which have historically been relatively fragile. The policing forces will also find that lock-down fatigue can lead to more ‘innocuous’ attempts at breaking the prevailing rules. As these ‘tests’ of the constraints become more apparent, so will the responsible reaction of the security forces be tested. The institutional credibility being built by the State’s Public Health authorities can be undermined by the ill-discipline of its policing agencies. The extended lockdown also lengthens the uncertainty in township areas about the return to normal economic activity and the basic ability of families to put food on the table. This insecurity can also have a detrimental effect on the social compact achieved thus far as we move into the latter lockdown period. The ability of the State to maintain essential services and provide for a society under greater social strain can be unsettling for the political establishment in the short-to-medium term Lockdown fatigue and related economic unease is also likely to become more of a focus for South Africa’s Opposition parties who have largely themselves been locked-out of the process to combat Covid-19. Given that the responsibility for the lockdown has fallen almost entirely on the government and it’s Ministerial-driven management of the period, Opposition parties have been left largely neutered in their response. Either they buy-in to the regulations or run the risk of being labelled as unpatriotic. As we move towards the latter part of the lockdown, expect the debate to turn from what government is doing – to differing alternatives about the future course of managing Covid-19 over an extended period of time. Already, we have seen the DA attempt to get ahead of this debate my presenting its Smart Lockdown blueprint which clearly shows that the party is attempting to provide a contestation of ideas to that which might be presented by the ANC via the President and Health Minister. This signals that the initial period of political solidarity is now over as alternative suggestions for the immediate future from a variety of parties are likely forthcoming. It is perhaps a welcome sign that competing suggestions can now result in a much broader national debate. However, it will dilute the single-dominant discourse created by President Ramaphosa and his ANC Ministers in the first few weeks of the lockdown. Thus far, South Africa has managed a commendable show of unity of purpose. But don’t expect this to last forever. And for President Ramaphosa, he may well find that the way the country manages the latter lockdown days and the initial phase of re-opening aspects of the economy will return him to more conflictual and competitive times quicker than he might think. This article first appeared on News24 