EFF condemns the vandalization of schools in the midst of Covid-19 pandemic 21 April 2020 The EFF condemns the rampant vandalising of schools amidst the National Lockdown to combat COVID-19. It is self-destructive and criminal behaviour that places the futures of millions of South African children at risk. It is reported that 397 schools have been vandalised to date since the National Lockdown These attacks on schools are characterised by massive damage to infrastructure, the burning of classrooms, theft of computers and the loss of important teaming related documents. It is saddening that these criminal acts are done in the most vulnerable and needy communities, with township and rural schools being targeted. This means that those who need education the most, in order to alleviate their conditions and those of their communities will find themselves without centres of education after the National Lockdown. These acts of terrorism against the Basic Education sector need to be taken seriously and questions must be raised as to how this spike in vandalism occurs while there is an increased presence of law enforcement on our streets. Furthermore, those who are apprehended for committing these crimes must face harsh sentences for compromising the futures of young South Africans and placing a heavy financial burden on law enforcement agencies and the fiscus of the country which should be focused on combatting COVID-19. Communities must band together to defend centresof education as they are the beacon Of hope for their children. To destroy schools is to further condemn poor black South Africans to poverty and illiteracy. It is the responsibility of members of the community to assist in identifying and arresting those who subject our people to a fate of hopelessness and illiteracy. We call on all EFF members to be vigilant and assist in fighting criminality that jeopardises the future of our children. Our schools must be defended from thuggery that undermines the developmental prospects of South Africa. Issued by Vuyani Pambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 21 April 2020