DA to act against illegal and unethical conduct of the ANC in Tshwane 8 January 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[468,60],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_5',112,'0','0']));The Democratic Alliance (DA) notes the allegations of misconduct where the African National Congress (ANC) and Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) tried to force the Speaker of the DA-led Tshwane Council, Katlego Mathebe, to convene a council meeting by means of a petition signed by all its members. A preliminary investigation by the Office of the Speaker has revealed that some of the signatures were allegedly forged, which is nothing but a fraudulant act. The Speaker will institute a thorough forensic investigation in this regard. It is clear that in the midst of an ongoing court battle in Tshwane to uphold and fight for the protection of our democracy and the rule of law, the ANC will stop at nothing to flex their political muscles to obtain power through the back door. eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));The DA will write to Gauteng Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs MEC, Lebogang Maile and call for the suspension of those councillors involved in this fraudulant act to be dealt with urgently. Furthermore, the DA will lay criminal charges against the fraudulent councillors. The ANC has played its hand and shown they will stop at nothing to gain control of Tshwane. Even undemocratic and illegal methods, effectively trying to stage a coup. The DA-led Tshwane is the last metro they lost in 2016 and they are desperate to lay their hands on all resources the DA-led administration has built up to fund their local government campaign in 2021. It is a disgrace that public representatives elected by the residents of Tshwane are involved in such fraudulent and unlawful acts, and proves that this will be the basis on which they will govern should they forcefully and illegally obtain power through their continuous backdoor tactics. The DA Caucus in Tshwane is the most diverse in the Council and united in its purpose. The ANC's continued use of racist tactics to sow division in the DA caucus, or to create a perception of division, just further exposes its own racism. We stand behind the DA members whom they personally attack using rumour and inuendo without any basis in fact. Race politics contravenes the intention and spirit of our Constitution and once again proves the ANC desperation to take control of Tshwane knows no bounds. The DA will protect its members and encourage civil action where appropriate. The ANC's dishonest slander can no longer be tolerated and will be challenged. Our hard-fought democracy is too important to be slaughtered on the altar of political expediency at every expense. It is only the DA that stands on the side of true individual freedom in South Africa, a calling we will not waver from. The DA will continue to fight for our democracy and the rule of law to be protected. We will continue to uphold our ethical high ground and hold our members to account to protect the rights of the residents of Tshwane. Issued by Mpho Mehlape-Zimu,DA Deputy Chief Whip - City of Tshwane, 8 January 2020