Office of the Public Protector: PSA demands investigation into maladministration and irregular appointment of CEO 9 January 2020 The Public Servants Association (PSA) as the majority union representing employees as the Office of the Public Protector (OPP) has requested the Speaker of Parliament, Ms Thandi Modise, to launch an investigation into maladministration in the OPP. The PSA is concerned about the recent spate of suspensions and dismissals of senior executives and investigators. The PSA previously condemned the irregular appointment of the Chief Executive Officer, Mr Vussy Mahlangu, who was dismissed by the Department of Rural Development and Land Reform before joining the OPP as Chief Executive Officer. The advertisement of the said post clearly that the candidate had to obtain a security clearance. Mr Mahlangu, however, does not to date have a security as result of his dismissal by a government department. The staff managed by Mr Mahlangu at the OPP have obtained security clearance. The PSA indicated that the Public Protector should provide clarity to South Africans whether Mr Mahlangu disclosed in his CV or during interviews that he was dismissed from the Public Service owing to misconduct relating to dishonesty. If not, the Public Protector needs to advise if she was aware of his previous disciplinary record before the appointment. If indeed so, the Public Protector needs to justify appointing Mr Mahlangu in the face of glaring knowledge and evidence and the CEO position requires a person of integrity. The PSA submitted these questions to the OPP and gave the Office until 18 December 2019 to respond. The Public Protector acknowledged receipt of the PSA’s correspondence and requested an extension to respond on 13 January 2020. It has now emerged that Mr Mahlangu has resigned from the OPP without having to account for his maladministration of Office and purging of employees. The PSA is disturbed about the trend whereby senior executives tender resignation without accounting for their actions. It is the PSA’s view that such resignations should not be accepted until employees have accounted for their actions. The PSA has also requested the Speaker of Parliament to launch an investigation in the appointment of Mr Mahlangu. Issued by Tahir Maepa on behalf of Public Servants Association, 9 January 2020