Minister Nzimande must provide urgent clarity on NSFAS 2020 cash disbursements 16 January 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_6',112,'0','0']));With universities and TVET colleges commencing student registrations this week and the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) announcing that it had received a record 542 268 first-time applications for 2020, the Alliance for Academic Success has written to Minister Blade Nzimande requesting urgent clarification on whether the NSFAS learning material allowance will again be paid as a cashable allowance for the 2020 academic year. In January 2019, the NSFAS instituted a unilateral policy change, without input from critical education sector stakeholders, which saw allowances for textbooks and other learning material previously paid to NSFAS students via ring-fenced systems, now being paid out in cash. This change has meant that there is no auditable system for NSFAS to evaluate if and how the public funds for education are in fact spent on essential textbooks critical for academic success. eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_0',113,'0','0']));eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','1']));Following the policy change last year, it has been clear that students are not buying their prescribed academic textbooks, with book sales in 2019 dropping by over R500 million, an over 40% drop across the bookselling industry when compared to 2018, and up to 91% at university campuses. The biggest drops have been at campuses with the highest percentage of NSFAS-funded students, especially rural and historically disadvantaged institutions that the Minister has identified as one of his priorities. SMME’s, emerging book stores and printers have been hardest hit by this policy change, with many having closed their businesses and retrenched staff. Without any change in policy, industry projections are that there will be more closures of campus bookstores and job losses across the country within the first half of 2020, and at a time when government should be urgently implementing policies and measures to encourage and enable small business growth and job creation. This is particularly important in higher education, when we need to be responsibly supporting our students to develop their full potential and skills for a highly competitive global job market. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_7',114,'0','0']));In addition, the development and distribution of local undergraduate learning content is at grave risk. Without a sustainable industry, South Africa’s proud academic publishing infrastructure and skilled specialist academic authors will be hard pressed to develop local content to meet our developmental goals. While Minister Nzimande and members of the Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Higher Education, Science and Technology have expressed their concern over the lack of proper auditable monitoring of how NSFAS funding for learning material is being spent, steps have yet to be taken to determine the effect this policy change has had on student’s academic performance. At the launch of the NSFAS 2020 application cycle in September last year, Minister Nzimande announced that he would be appointing a ministerial task team within two months to review the business processes and functionality of NSFAS in order to ensure that the bursary scheme functions optimally over the long-term. The Alliance considers that for NSFAS to function optimally it is critical that every cent of funding is spent in a way that ensures students can succeed and fulfil their potential during their studies. It is therefore crucial that the ministerial review includes an assessment of last year’s policy change and whether learning material allowances being disbursed to students is in fact being spent on academic textbooks and learning materials as intended. However, while this assessment process is underway we believe that, based on the 2019 data we have provided to all stakeholders, the Minister needs to ask NSFAS to reinstate the ring-fenced textbook and learning material allowance for 2020. Without this, the unintended consequences of last year’s decision will critically and irreversibly affect the development, distribution and dissemination of undergraduate learning content in South Africa. We have therefore written to Minister Nzimande requesting the following: Whether the ministerial task team has been appointed, and if so more detail on the scope of their review, when it is expected to be completed, and to include an assessment of the impact of the 2019 decision; Urgent clarity on how this year’s learning material allowance will be paid; eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-banner-1','ezslot_8',116,'0','0']));That the systems assuring learning material funds are spent on learning material through an auditable ring-fenced system be reinstated until the task team completes its process. The Alliance, with its members as critical partners in the educational ecosystem, remains committed to working with government and all stakeholders to ensure NSFAS students and higher education in general get the support they need to excel academically and to attain financial freedom in the future. Issued by Mohamed Kharwa, Convener of the Alliance for Academic Success, 16 January 2020