ANC statement on the resignation of Eskom Board Chairperson Mr Jabu Mabuza 10 January 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_4',112,'0','0']));The African National Congress (ANC) has noted the resignation of the Chairperson of the Eskom board, Mr. Jabu Mabuza as announced by President Cyril Ramaphosa today, 10th January 2020. The ANC further notes that Mr. Mabuza states as the reason for his resignation Eskom’s failure to fulfil an undertaking made to President Ramaphosa and his Deputy President David Mabuza in their capacities as President and Deputy President of the Republic of South Africa; to keep the national electricity supply stable and ensure there will be no load-shedding until mid-January 2020.Eskom resumed nationwide rotational load-shedding from last week, citing mechanical breakdowns and unplanned maintenance. The ANC regards this resignation as a laudable demonstration of accountability on the part of Mr. Mabuza. Building an ethical developmental state places a responsibility on those tasked with any form of fiduciary duty on institutions of state to ensure that public interest takes precedence over any other.Addressing and overcoming the crisis at Eskom necessitates that the board be strengthened and injected with renewed impetus to implement Eskom’s turnaround plan. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_5',113,'0','0']));Eskom plays a critical and strategic role in the South African economy and it is essential that the Eskom board be stabilized as a matter of urgency. Energy security is the single biggest threat to economic growth which requires urgent and decisive action. The ANC reiterates – as per the resolutions of the 54th National Conference; that the country’s state -owned enterprises (SOE’s) are drivers of development and socio-economic transformation; and must be capacitated to enable them to fulfill their critical developmental role. In the resolutions we noted that firm action is required to improve the governance and performance of SOE’s by ensuring the appointment of skilled staff and qualified board members, and to protect them from improper interference. Further to this, at its last ordinary sitting of the National Executive Committee (NEC) in December 2019, the ANC’s highest decision making body called for a comprehensive approach as well as ‘bold and creative solutions’ to address the crises facing many of our SOE’s as well as to give effect to the resolutions of the 54th national conference.To amplify this point the Special NEC convened on the eve of the 108th Anniversary agreed to dedicate time towards discussing and pronouncing on immediate measures required to address key challenges confronting SOE’s. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_6',114,'0','0']));The ANC notes that Mr. Mabuza assumed the helm of the Eskom board at an extremely difficult time, and has executed his duties to the best of his abilities. The ANC wishes him well in his future endeavors. Issued by Pule Mabe, National Spokesperson, ANC, 10 January 2020