ANC Western Cape Statement on the 108th Anniversary of our organization's founding 8 January 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_2',112,'0','0']));ANC Western Cape celebrates today the 108th Anniversary of the founding of our glorious movement as a remarkable milestone, unique in the history of political formations. As we said in 1912, so must we say today - Excelsior - ever-upwards, onwards, higher, as we seek the complete fulfillment of our core and deepest aspirations. Today, we ask ourselves what are these aspirations and how far have we gone in achieving them? The ANC's mission was always and remains that of constructing a united, non-racial, non-sexist, democratic and prosperous South Africa. On this score, we are proud of the work we have done in these 108 years. At the height of both external and internal race antagonism, where racial crusaders were destroying our country and our people, resulting in an internal reaction that demanded the ANC take a racialised posture, the ANC stood firm in its mission. Excelsior, onwards, upwards, higher. The ANC has also had a remarkable economic mission in the last 108 years. We celebrate one of our earlier guiding economic documents, 'African Claims', prepared under the stewardship of President-General AB Xuma in 1943, which was clear that the 'State intervention to secure rights to systems of education, health, welfare and universal political and social citizenship' is at the core of full and meaningful economic participation of all South African citizens. We celebrate our organization’s valiant efforts in ensuring all these critical interventions have been prioritized by the state. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));We also celebrate another guiding document prepared under the stewardship of President-General Albert Luthuli, 'If I were a Prime Minister', which also clearly outlined 'a future (ANC) government which would regulate the private sector, redistribute rates of taxation, state protection of workers right to strike, concomitant with meaningful 'social compacting' accords between labour, the state and private enterprise'. The ANC government has had remarkable successes in this regard. The ANC has always been clear, as constantly stated by President OR Tambo that our revolution must lead to the use of state power to advance objectives of fundamental social transformation. We are proud of the work the ANC has done in fulfilling all these aspirations. With greater vigour and determination, the coming years will be defined by a society where all our people are full participants in their country’s economy, education, health, in order to fully exercise all their social and political rights. Excelsior - ever upwards, onwards, higher. In the 25 years that we have been in government, much work in reconstructing the state was done in order to ensure we are capable of delivering on these aspirations. Through Ready to Govern, Reconstruction and Development programme, various election manifestos, strategies and tactics, conference resolutions, all summed up to produce the National Development Plan (NDP), there has been much prodding and forward movement, with setbacks but always moving forward. We are proud of all the work our organization has done as a governing party. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_7',114,'0','0']));Our 25-year review points to much wealth that has been created, valiant and successful work towards eradicating poverty but a rising level of inequality, more so now within races. The ANC remains alive to these challenges. As the ANC Western Cape, we are also proud of the work the ANC has done in our Province. Our goal remains that of reclaiming state power in order to put it to good use for fundamental social change in our Province. We have had times where the City of Cape Town, which is home to 60% of the province's population, has been voted the most unequal city in the world, and this inequality remains largely racialised. Much work needs to be done to reverse the historical damage done to our province. We celebrate with all our people in Kimberly and around the country and look forward to the NEC message for the year on Saturday. eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_8',115,'0','0']));Excelsior, ever-upward, onwards, higher. Issued by Ronalda Nalumango, Interim Provincial Coordinator, ANC Western Cape, 8 January 2020