Tshwane special council meeting marred by disruptions 16 January 2020 The Tshwane special council meeting, scheduled to hear motions of no confidence against the mayor and speaker, has been marred by disruptions, scuffles and the attempted removal of an EFF councillor. The sitting, which got underway on Thursday morning, descended into chaos as the EFF and ANC argued with Speaker Katlego Mathebe about the sequence of the motions of no confidence. Motions of no confidence were tabled against Mayor Stevens Mokgalapa, Mathebe, the acting speaker Zweli Khumalo and the chair of chairs. The ANC and EFF maintained that they should set up the sequence of the motions, which had already been set by Mathebe. ANC calls for Cogta intervention According to the agenda, the motion against Mokgalapa is scheduled to be heard first, followed by the motion against Khumalo, then the chair of chairs and lastly the motion against Mathebe. The sequence of the motions is important as it would dictate who presides over the motions. Mathebe did not bend to the demands of opposition parties, insisting that the agenda would not change and the meeting should continue. ANC members also called for the Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) to take control of the meeting as Mathebe and Khumalo are both facing motions of no confidence and are thus conflicted. Mathebe retorted by saying Cogta would not "interfere" in the council sitting. Scuffle After a lot of shouting back and forth, a party caucus was called. During this break, a scuffle broke out between ANC councillors and the chief of staff in the speaker's office. Additional plain-clothed security officers were called to the meeting which was met with protest by ANC and EFF members. Once the meeting was back in session, chaos erupted again with several councillors shouting at Mathebe. The speaker then ordered that EFF councillor Obakeng Ramabodu be removed from the meeting. The ANC and EFF caucus protested against the removal and broke out in song. While Ramabodu was not removed, Mathebe warned that she would not continue with the meeting until he had left. Another caucus meeting was called for and granted. News24