Minister Cele’s anti-gun campaign could lead to thousands of jobs losses in KZN 27 January 2020 KwaZulu-Natal’s (KZN’s) hunting and small associated businesses stand to lose billions of rands and face even tougher economic times should the ANC push ahead with the amended Firearms Control Bill. Recent comments by Police Minister Bheki Cele on private citizens not owning firearms, or being restricted to one firearm could be the final nail in the coffin of an already pressurised provincial hunting industry. The knock-on economic effects of the proposed Bill are terrible. Here in KZN it could lead to the loss of thousands of jobs, mainly in rural areas. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_4',113,'0','0']));Although an emotive issue, the KZN economy and dozens of mainly rural game farms rely almost entirely on each hunting season for their income. Coupled with hunting, is the direct and indirect spend on associated industries that range from taxidermists to outdoor equipment sales and specialist butcheries. In a university study conducted, it is estimated the South African hunting industry generates more than R11 billion annually – while international hunters spend upward of 20 000 Dollars each on a two-week hunt. Hunting activities generate twice the revenue of ordinary safari visitors, while approximately 50 000 people are employed in the industry. Interestingly, Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife – which offers annual hunting packages, is also set to lose financially should an amendment ban private firearm ownership or severely restrict hunting rifle acquisition. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_1',114,'0','0']));Whereas Cele’s populist rhetoric has been somewhat confined to self-defence firearms – changes to the provisions for owning sporting or hunting rifles are on the cards. The DA believes that Cele’s rash political statements do nothing to help an already embattled hunting industry. The knock-on effects and lack of investor confidence sparked by Cele’s utterances is of concern. The legal and ethical hunting of KZN game species is a complex and often-technical one. Ethical hunting practices in turn demand that the right rifle is used for the right game. Any amendments to the Act that prohibit firearm ownership will cost this province thousands of jobs – while further cumbersome restrictions could severely curtail a niche industry. The DA in KZN will request that this matter be placed on the agenda at the next meeting of province’s portfolio committee on conservation, scheduled for 7 February. We will also table a motion in the KZN Legislature, calling for a debate on how to boost and protect this industry. Issued by Heinz de Boer,DA KZN Spokesperson on Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs, 27 January 2020eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_3',115,'0','0']));