Minister Blade Nzimande condemns violent student protests 29 January 2020 The Minister of Higher Education, Science and Technology, Dr Blade Nzimande, strongly condemns violent student protests that have taken place at a few universities in the country. The violent protests which led to damages at two university campuses are wholly unacceptable and provides no solution to student concerns. “Protesting students must refrain from intimidating the general student population and university employees by making inflammatory and provocative statements that incite violence,” said Minister Nzimande. Minister Nzimande further warned students that “destruction of property is a criminal offence and all those engaging in such acts will be apprehended by law enforcement agencies and face the full might of the law”. Minister Nzimande re-iterates his commitment to further engagements with student leaders; however damage to property and violence can never be tolerated. “I wish to reiterate to student leaders that my door is always open for any further engagement and discussion. However, such engagements cannot take place in an environment of violence and destruction,” says Minister Nzimande. In ensuring access and success of student in our universities and TVET Colleges, government has, amongst others, ensured the following: Funding has been allocated more than once to address debt of NSFAS qualifying students. Last year approximately R1 billion was set aside by Government to support over 50 000 students who were registered in 2018 carrying student debt – their debt is being processed by NSFAS. So far about R450 million of this historic debt has been cleared; NSFAS qualifying students who carry debt from 2019 are allowed to register provided they sign the Acknowledgement of Debt (AOD) form at the institution to which they are returning; Funds have been transferred to NSFAS to assist with dealing with this debt First time entering students who are admitted to universities but did not apply for NSFAS for whatever reason, will be able to register by signing an AOD. NSFAS will process their applications in partnership with the university, and if they are eligible for funding they will receive the bursary and the students will carry no debt going forward. All students whether they owe the university or not, must be allowed to access their academic records and examination results, either for the purpose of pursuing employment opportunities or for further study; For post-graduate students, the National Research Foundation (NRF) has developed a new student funding policy for implementation in 2021. This policy is pro-poor and focuses on improving equity, access, success and throughput in postgraduate studies. In the 2020 academic year, NRF is currently in the process of screening the honours applications and finding outcomes will be available by the 31st January 2020. The NRF approved 31% of Masters and 32% of Doctoral degrees scholarships; All NSFAS qualifying students are able to register at all 26 public universities without paying an upfront or registration fee; The department is working to support growth of student accommodation through the implementation of the Student Housing Infrastructure Programme (SHIP). A partnership is in place between the Department of Higher Education and Training, National Treasury, the European Union Infrastructure Investment Programme for South Africa (IIPSA), Development Bank of South Africa (DBSA) and the private sector to support the SHIP; and In the absence of sufficient accredited accommodation, NSFAS qualifying students are able to access non-accredited single use accommodation, as long as the university has a registration and verification process in place. This is an interim arrangement, while working towards a more comprehensive accreditation and verification system; NSFAS has, for the first time, processed all applications prior to the commencement of the 2020 academic year; The Minister calls on law enforcement agencies to act swiftly against any acts which results in violence and destruction of public and private property. The Minister further calls on university vice chancellors to tighten up security and take any measures necessary to prevent any form of destruction and to protect life and limb. The Minister and the Department will closely monitor developments at all universities and, together with university management, will respond to ensure the safety of all students. Issued by Ishmael Mnisi on behalf of Department of Higher Education, 29 January 2020