Psychiatric care: Northern Cape a case study in non-compliance 28 January 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in the Northern Cape is dismayed by recent revelations showing that patients requiring psychiatric care continue to be denied their constitutional rights to medical care, especially those who rely on the provincial government for specialized treatment. I call on the Member of the Executive Council for Health, MaseManopole, to launch an investigation into the level of compliance with the National Mental Health Policy Framework and Strategic Plan 2013 – 2020, specifically by the Robert Sobukwe Hospital in Kimberley, and to investigate persistent allegations surrounding the apparent inequalities in care given to patients with private medical aid and patients dependent upon the state for care. At the same time, I warn the MEC that we will be soliciting an investigation from the South African Human Rights Commission (SAHRC). I encourage any member of the public who has experienced atrocious levels of service from the provincial department of Health to contact me as a matter of urgency for urgent intervention. It has been alleged that specific mental health care practitioners, whose names are known to the DA and will be given to the MEC, treat patients with private medical aid for longer periods and yet leave state patients to fend for themselves after much shorter timeframes of treatment. In some instances, it almost seems as though facilities such as the Robert Sobukwe Hospital appears to be eager to push state patients through the system on what constitutes a type of conveyer belt of care. One is left to wonder if there is there an attempt to rid the system of the supposed burden of care for patients who cannot afford their own medical aid? The National Mental Health Policy Framework requires an intricate network of knowledge, expertise and skills from government sectors in providing care to patients as well as their families. But experiences of those who have their loved ones admitted for involuntary care shows that the ongoing shortcomings and inequalities in the provision of psychiatric care in the province practically makes the Northern Cape a case study in non-compliance. Firstly, it can be difficult to get assistance from SAPS due to the ignorance of some police officers on their role in upholding the provisions of the Mental Health Care Act. Secondly, the process of getting the patient admitted to the Robert Sobukwe Hospital in Kimberley for psychiatric observation is unnecessarily frustrating. While there is little to no consultation with the patient’s family, patients are also kept under psychiatric observation for longer timeframes than the 72-hour timeframe stipulated by law. A short stay of three days in effect becomes a long stay, often lasting longer than a month, while the family as support base which allows for post-treatment care and support remains sidelined. These families remain relegated to a swirling vortex of entropy that mental health condition brings to their lives. The lack of suitably qualified staff for the operationalisaton of the newly constructed mental health facility is an embarrassment for the province. Securing 90 beds at the new mental hospital does nothing for the treatment of patients without staff. Despite more than a decade of promises about the opening and operationalization of the facility, it still remains an empty shell serving as a monument to corruption and nothing else. After ribbons were cut on the site last year to celebrate the theoretical opening of the facility, the provincial department undertook to accelerate the process of appointments. It still took three months before the position of chief executive officer for the facility was even advertised. Since the circular dated 6 December 2019 gives the deadline of 20 December 2019 for applications, it is unlikely that the appointment of the CEO will be finalized in the current 2019/20 financial year and far more likely that it will be postponed to the 2020/21 financial year instead. Considering the crucial role of the CEO in human resource management and the department’s notorious black hole of debt, which increases exponentially every year, we have to ask if costs makes appointments unaffordable and if the department intends to postpone the finalization of all outstanding appointments to the 2021/22 financial year instead. I appeal to the Honourable Manopole that she gives the necessary leadership and act in her capacity as MEC to ensure that those who report to her, do what the laws of the country and the laws of common decency require. Together we will take back what rightfully belongs to us and that is our dignity! Issued by Fawzia Rhoda, DA Member of the Northern Cape Provincial Legislature, 28 January 2020