IFP: Corruption and nepotism within SAPS must be urgently tackled 23 January 2020 The IFP in KZN calls for an urgent investigation into the allegations made by the former KZN Police Spokesperson Vincent Mdunge. Mdunge allegedly told the SABC station UKhozi FM that he was used as a sacrificial lamb by senior members in the SAPS who were against former KZN Police Commissioner, Lieutenant-General  Mmamonye Ngobeni. The IFP urges Vincent Mdunge to expose the names of all those who were involved in the plot. He must provide more details on his allegations and leave no stone unturned. He must tell us the names of those who were behind the plotting and those that did not have Matric but were secretly informed to resign from the SAPS instead of getting jailed for fraud. He must tell us everything he knows because the problems is not just at the top, but also in the middle and lower management structures in the SAPS. The IFP in KwaZulu-Natal has been constantly making demands that the KZN MEC of Community Safety and Liaison, Bheki Ntuli to present an urgent and well-devised plan with implementable measures and timeframes of how he intends to clean corruption within the law-enforcement sector that includes graft in all ranks, bribery, sextortion by law-enforcement officers in this province.The image and role of law-enforcement officials has been, over the years severely compromised due to corruption and therefore we demand a no-nonsense approach that will swiftly expose and assist to weed out all affected officials. Hundreds of serving police officers are allegedly to be hard core criminals and belong to jail. We therefore demand that a skill and life style audit must be conducted in the SAPS, to see if the SAPS has the right people placed in the right positions. The IFP calls for an end to nepotism, abuse of power and neglect of rule of law. Every effort must be made to ensure that the appointment and promotion processes are open, transparent and impartial. Where allegations are found to be true, timely and appropriate action must be taken by top leadership to rectify the situation. The IFP calls for a skills audit considering the fact that in 2019 the Institute of Security Studies (ISS), stated that the SAPS was to promote 600 people into management positions not necessarily because they have the skills or experience but primarily because of their political affiliation under the Non-Statutory Forces (NSF) Project. According to the plan, most were to jump a number of ranks and be propelled into top positions without the many years of experience needed to become an effective commander. The IFP reiterate its call for removal of greedy, politically influenced, ethically compromised individuals and those members of the Law Enforcement who use the profession as a ‘get rich quick’ scheme. Issued by Blessed Gwala, Spokesperson on Community Safety and Liaison, IFP KZN, 23 January 2020