DA Joburg Caucus Will Resist ANCs Bully Tactics 15 January 2020 As schools reopen, the DA Johannesburg Caucus returns to Council to continue the work which we began three years ago. However, the events of last year mean we shall start this year in opposition benches. Yet, as the DA Joburg Caucus we take pride in what we have achieved over the past 3 years, and as we move into the opposition we do so knowing that we have delivered Diphetogo – real changes. We will continue executing our duties in all the 135 Wards across the City. Collectively, we remain committed to our oversight role of holding the Executive Mayor, his team of MMC’s and the Administration accountable. This oversight role, we intend to execute with vigour coupled with the professionalism we have always demonstrated as the DA. It is this very oversight role which the ANC seems hell-bent on undermining. As the DA Caucus, we have noted the ANC attempts to bully their way into the Speaker, Chief Whip and Chair of Chairs offices in the City of Johannesburg. Unlike the ANC, we have no intention of obstructing the smooth running of government. However, we want to warn the ANC that any move to illegitimately impose any individuals into these offices will be met with resistance and hostility from the DA Caucus. While we accepted and respect the election of the ANC Mayor in Council, we were deeply disappointed by the actions of at least 3 DA Councillors who voted for the ANC. Nonetheless, we are grateful that the party swiftly finalised the disciplinary processes with regards to former Councillors Choonie and Douglas who are no longer members of the DA. This step allows us to now solely focus on our oversight task in Council and other important Constituency/and Party work awaiting us in this New Year. Lastly, we take this opportunity to wish our sister Caucuses in Tshwane, Nelson Mandela Bay, Mangaung, Ekhuruleni, Cape Town and others a successful New Year. Notwithstanding the difficulties some are going through, may we approach the New Year with a full appreciation of the huge obligation we carry on behalf of our residents of ensuring that we fight against the decay and collapse of our Municipalities in the hands of the ANC. Issued by Funzela Ngobeni, DA CoJ Caucus Leader, Regional Chairperson DA Johannesburg, 15 January 2020