The DA will continue to turn Tshwane around Note to Editors: The following comments were delivered today by DA Gauteng Provincial Leader, John Moodey MPL at a press conference at Nkululeko House in Johannesburg. Moodey was joined by acting City of Tshwane Executive Mayor, Abel Tau Cllr and Member of Mayoral Committee on Finance, Mare-Lise Fourie Cllr. This year marks the fourth year since the 2016 Local Government Elections when South Africans gave the Democratic Alliance (DA) a mandate for change and entrusted us with governing more than 30 municipalities across the country. Where the DA governs, including in Tshwane, we excel in providing services, creating jobs, keeping communities safe and rooting out corruption. Credit Rating Since taking over the administration of Tshwane in 2016, the city has received two upgrades from ratings agency Moodys. In 2018 from negative to stable and in 2019 double notches up from stable.eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0'])); Mokgalapa Special leave The Federal Legal Commission of the DA has concluded its investigations into recent allegations against the DA-led City of Tshwane Executive Mayor Stevens Mokgalapa. These recommendations will be discussed at an upcoming Federal Executive (FEDEX) meeting later this month. Furthermore, the ethics committee at the City of Tshwane is expected to conclude its own investigation into the matter soon. Mayor Mokgalapa took voluntary special leave to allow the ethics committee to do its work without casting aspersions on the process. For now, Abel Tau serves as the Acting Executive Mayor of the City of Tshwane. Tshwane status quoeval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_2',115,'0','0'])); Recent comments by the Gauteng Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs MEC, Lebogang Maile, alleging that the city has been placed under administration are untrue and misleading. In fact Maile's comments are highly opportunistic and aimed at stirring a negative public discourse. I call on Maile to rise above partisan politics and stop misleading the public for political gain. Court case The Gauteng North High Court has granted an urgent interdict in favour of the DA after a chaotic Council meeting on 5 December 2019. As such the unlawful decisions of no confidence in the Speaker, Katlego Mathebe and Mayor Stevens Mokgalapa were suspended pending a full review. The DA-led coalition thus remains in control of Tshwane. This is in spite of actions by the ANC and the EFF that the Judge described as violent and inconsistent with the Constitution. The Judge required the DA to submit its affidavit for the review hearing. This was done last week. We are now awaiting further steps in terms of the Court process. We are confident that we will be successful in the actual review hearing and that the unlawful motions will be finally set aside. Tshwane floods A transit plan has been identified and victims will be relocated from the church to three portions of land that have been identified by the city. The city together with non governmental organizations (NGO's) are continuing to provide the victims with relief aid. Hammanskraal water The City of Tshwane will be signing a Menorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the Magalies and Erwat Water Boards to improve the quality and supply of water to residents of Hammanskraal. This, by redirecting funds and grants to the two entities to expedite the process. The City is also in discussion with the Department of Water and Sanitation to finalise a tripartite MOU to stabilise the water supply across the city. Currently 35 water tankers are stationed across affected areas in Hammanskraal to ensure safe and sufficient water is available. Water interruptions at Cullinan Water has been restored to Cullinan and the reservoir will be at 100% capacity by the end of this week. This is a major achievement because when the heavy floods washed away the pipeline, the city was told it would take 8 months to restore. Conclusioneval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-leader-1','ezslot_0',118,'0','0'])); Where the DA governs change is tangible. The DA is ready to take this message of change to South Africa in 2021, because where the DA governs, people see tangible change. Statement issued by John Moodey MPL - DA Gauteng Provincial Leader, 7 January 2019