Special Council Meeting of 8th January 2020 7 January 2020 The ANC in Tshwane together with the EFF, submitted a co-signed and joint petition to the Speaker of Council Katlego Mathebe, for her to call a Special Council meeting on 8th January 2020, the request was sent to the Speaker on the 3rd of January 2020. In terms of Section 29 [1] of the Municipal Structures Act, a majority of Cllrs can petition the Speaker to call a special meeting to deal with Council business and important matters in a set agenda. The Speaker must then call that meeting, it is not her discretion but the meeting is mandatory. The Agenda is mainly on the removal of DA Presiding Officers by motions as follows: - A motion of no confidence on the Speaker - A motion of no confidence on the Purported 'Deputy Speaker' - A motion of no confidence on the Executive Mayor - A motion of no confidence on the Chief Whip - A motion of no confidence on the Chair of Chairs - A motion to dissolve all oversight committees The ANC gave the Speaker until the 6th of January 2020 to respond and meet with parties to draft an agenda but the Speaker has not responded. The ANC has copied the MEC of CoGTA and the Acting City Manager in the same letter sent to the Speaker for consideration and summary action should the Speaker fail to call the meeting as mandated. Section 36 [3] of the Municipal Structures Act is clear on the process that should be followed in the absence of a Council Speaker and we will follow the letter of the law to make sure that Council is properly constituted should the Speaker use delaying tactics and disregard her Constitutional obligation of calling a Council meeting as petitioned. 1. On the former Speaker — "The DA Witch" [Katlego Mathebe] In an audio dubbed 'sex in the City', wherein the former Executive Mayor Stevens Mokgalapa is loudly heard engaging in sexual activities with the former MMC Sheila-Lynn Senkubuge — the former Mayor and MMC mention several times that the former Speaker of Council, Ms Katlego Mathebe is a 'witch'. The ANC always held a view that the 'witch' accusation was just part of the usual factional and personal jealousy in the DA. We have since reconsidered our position and in fact looked deeper into the accusations and allegations, what we found is startling — we share the details here below: The former Speaker Ms. Katlego 'The DA Witch' Mathebe has been running an anti-Mokgalapa campaign in the DA to finish him-off and make sure that he is ejected before the end of January 2020; The former Speaker Katlego 'The DA Witch' Mathebe is spreading stories that Cllr Abel Tau [The fake Acting Mayor] is corrupt in the way his department lost RI .9 Billion in a Smart Meter project that went horribly wrong and she also alleges that Tau's department paid "water tank owners" in Hammanskraal an extra R7 million in December 2019 without any water delivered to communities. The former Speaker Katlego 'The DA Witch' Mathebe is talking to madam Helen Zille regularly, in an attempt to convince her to accept a purported new relationship with the EFF to form a coalition government in Tshwane. Even after Helen told her that she wants nothing to do with the EFF and 'Black Political Parties". Helen Zille and John Steenhuisen share the latter view about EFF and 'Black Political Parties' in general, but 'The DA Witch' doesn't want to listen, because of her uncontrollable ambition to become the next Executive Mayor by hook or by crook. The former Speaker Katlego 'The DA Witch' Mathebe has insisted that she has capacity to hoodwink the EFF into a new deal and sweet-talk or mislead them to believe that the DA is genuine, she is apparently offering the EFF MMC positions and some deals and money if they agree. 'The DA Witch' has sent a text message to a senior EFF leader and she awaits a response — the ANC is aware of the contents of the text message after she bragged about it to DA colleagues. The former Speaker Katlego 'The DA Witch' Mathebe is not liked in the DA among the rank and file, especially the old "Black Caucus" who view her as an opportunist and a new arrivalist from COPE [Congress Of the People] who wants to rise to the top by hook or by crook- appear better than all old "DA Blacks" and become the queen and a 'special lady' in the eyes of Madam Helen Zille- something similar to what Mmusi Maimane used to be in his heydays. The former Speaker Katlego 'The DA Witch' Mathebe has also failed in her constitutional obligations to establish Ward Committees since 2016 when she was appointed. The City of Tshwane is the only Metropolitan Municipality without Ward Committees in the Republic of South Africa, she did that deliberately since the ANC is in charge of the majority of Wards in the City. The ANC runs 681107 Wards and the DA is responsible for the 39 remaining. The racist White Caucus view 'The DA Witch' as someone who lacks liberal political tradition and a pure position monger who sees herself better than all "'Black Caucus" leaders. Katlego 'The DA Witch' Mathebe has previously applied for the position of Tshwane Mayor and lost to Mokgalapa — she also tried many times to dethrone Solly Msimanga 'The Poster Boy of Corruption' — she is desperate to become a Mayor and she will do anything. "Katlego has been using the troubles of Mokgalapa as an opportunity for her to emerge as the next Mayor of Tshwane, according to senior White Caucus leaders in the DA. The ANC knows Katlego 'The DA Witch' Mathebe well, we have seen and observed how she back-bites her fellow DA colleagues in Council. The disgraced Cllrs Stevens Mokgalapa and Sheila-Lynn Senkubuge respectively, while in a "brief steamy sex session in the City offices", characterized and made statements that Katlego Mathebe is a 'Witch'. The duo were not necessarily driven by their lust for each other - they used logic for a few seconds. As the ANC, we are starting to believe Steve and Sheila that indeed Katlego is a terrible political 'DA Witch'. When Katlego's office spent more than half a million for a single special official funeral of a Cllr in Winterveld, we knew that we were dealing with more than an ordinary political problem but rather a 'DA Witch' as Stevens and Sheila will say. 2. On the 'purported Deputy Speaker' [Zweli Khumalo] The ANC has put it on record that according to local government legislation and legal framework, there is no Deputy Speaker provision in both the Municipal Systems Act and Municipal Structures Act, respectively. The position of Deputy Speaker is an internal arrangement in Council that was created by the DA and it is not based on any local government law or legislation. In other words, MrZweli Khumalo's position is unconstitutional. We challenge the DA to indicate in codified legislation or the South African Constitution, the provision used to appoint MrZweli Khumalo as a Deputy Speaker. We are also following information received and allegations made by some members of the "White Caucus" of the DA that MrZweli Khumalo, similar to Sheila-Lynn Senkubuge is a foreign national — we have to verify his documents. The ANC is taking the allegations seriously and it will make findings known immediately after we receive confirmation with Home Affairs and our professional investigation team. During the Council meeting of December 5th 2019, Councillors made an allegation that Zweli Khumalo came to the Council meeting smelling of alcohol and he was drunk. Another well-known allegation is that Zweli Khumalo is almost always drunk at Council meetings. The ANC has requested the Emergency Department and Metro Police to bring test-equipment and test Zweli Khumalo before the next Council meeting, that's if he agrees. 3. On the AWOL Executive Mayor The DA announced on the 6th of January 2020 that it started an investigation in the City of Tshwane against the promiscuous activities of the former Mayor Stevens Mokgalapa, the gimmick. The ANC can confirm that the DA told a pure 'Blue Lie' as there is no such investigation in Council. The Rules and Ethics Committee of Council has no record of such an investigation — so it was a broad day light 'Blue Lie' at an unfortunate press conference which has no bearing to anything whatsoever — the DA as always, just blew hot air and engaged in a trivial waffle gimmick to obfuscate their monumental failures of epic proportions in the City of Tshwane and in all cities were they failed to govern and were, as a result, unceremoniously removed. The former Speaker of the City of Tshwane Katlego 'The DA Wtch' Mathebe also failed to act against the disgraced former Executive Mayor Mokgalapa, a well known gimmick. It is also a 'Blue Lie' to say that Mokgalapa is on leave as Council declined his leave, the man is Absent Without Official Leave [AWOL] and Abel Tau is a fake 'self-appointed' acting Executive Mayor, no Council appointed Abel Tau to act. The ANC has heard that the DA is divided between the 'White and Black caucuses" on whether to fire or keep Mokgalapa, a liability in the eyes of the 'White Caucus' - after it emerged that their internal investigation and legal panel decided that he should vacate office as the Executive Mayor due to political foolishness, lack of judgment and buffoonery. Quite frankly we don't care, Mokgalapa has been completely useless from when he was appointed and he has brought misery not only to the DA, but to the people of Tshwane — the first time people knew about him is when he was engaged in promiscuous activities and brief moments in Council offices. Under Mokgalapa, we saw increased corruption, maladministration and malfeasance. Mokgalapa failed to stop the R12 Billion Glad Africa corruption [which is still prevalent and alive in the City, we have seen an invoice for the last six months of 201 9]; he brought with him the R18 Billion Aurecon property sale scandal and the WonderboomRlm a month, this was for no work done by an unknown company, with questionable credentials and a funny appointment process. In less than 12 months, Mokgalapa had a combined corruption package of more than R30 Billion plus. Mokgalapa was really an outstanding and stupendous 'gimmick', the DA's racist legal committee did well to extricate him, Mokgalapa brought the City into disrepute, disgraced his racist party and caused instability in Tshwane, he made employees and females in the City 'nervous' — ask Sheila, she had to resign immediately after he asked if she was nervous. The ANC is glad to see the back of Stevens Mokgalapa, we will remember him as the worst ever Executive Mayor in the history of the City of Tshwane, the sooner we forget about him the better. He introduced promiscuous behaviour in City's offices. We have in the meantime asked our religious committee to speak to faith-based organizations to come and conduct cleansing ceremonies in Tshwane House and other City owned offices 4. On the Chair of Chairs — Cllr Pretorius The ANC has noted that Cllr Pretorius is an old man, he has no energy and necessary stamina to do work. Cllr Pretoius is surely the oldest member of Council and the DA has been unfair and loaded him with responsibilities that he honestly fails to undertake for obvious reasons. Cllr Pretorius has dismally failed to finalize a governance model, to reduce the size of committees and to change Rules and Orders - the old man cannot cope with all the tasks given to him by the uncaring DA caucus that is divided on racial lines. Since 2016, Cllr Pretorius sleeps and only speaks before Council ends to announce all petitions received and nothing more. Truth be told, the DA has rendered the Council system dysfunctional and useless, people are struggling with basic services all round. 5. Conclusion Our people are living in a veritable hell of poor service delivery and no maintenance of infrastructure. The ANC and its multiparty arrangements intend to put the present horror to a grinding halt. The DA must be removed immediately so that we restore people's confidence and attend to: Electricity cable theft and unnecessary cuts in Atteridgeville, Mamelodi and Olievenhoutbosch Water crisis in Hammanskraal, Itireleng, Ladium and Cullinan Sanitation crisis in parts of Soshanguve, Garankuwa and Winterveld Lack of waste collection in various Townships Poor road infrastructure maintenance Lack of maintenance of traffic and street lights Cleaning of community parks Cleaning of graves in Townships Correction of the billing system Upgrading of informal settlements We are ready to work with others in a multiparty arrangement to make Tshwane a great City to live in! Issued by Bafuze Yabo, Regional Head of Communications, 7 January 2020 