Open Letter to Executive Mayor CouncillorMakhubo on the Dismissal of City Employees and Non-Payment of their Salaries  29 January 2020eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_3',112,'0','0'])); Dear Cllr Makhubo As the Caucus Leader of the Official Opposition, I have received numerous troubling reports from former and in some cases current City of Joburg employees regarding the treatment which has been meted out to them at the hands of your Administration. At the launch of the ANC’s 2019 election manifesto, President Ramaphosa made it clear that, if the ANC were to be re-elected, it would focus on job creation.  I agree wholeheartedly that job creation should always be top-of-mind.  In contrast however, your actions have shown either a disregard for the President’s words or shed light on another empty ANC promise.  eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','1'])); In December 2019, after your election as Mayor, your office decided to terminate the employment of over 150 City employees.  The officials whose employment you terminated have families to care for just as any other City employee.  They are now part of the growing unemployed community. Dismissal of Professionals When the DA-led administration came into power we were very careful to exercise logic and fairness when making decisions on the retention of political office employees.  We are of the belief that most officials are qualified professionals who are able to separate their work and private political affiliations.  It would be unreasonable and reckless to assume otherwise. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_4',114,'0','0'])); I am familiar with the contents of the “guiding principles for redeployment of employees employed in political offices”- document.  I am not aware of an informal interview process or assessment (skills audit) that took place to determine the continued suitability of the affected employees.  I understand that there is no obligation on a new political head to retain employees, still, the proper procedure and the rights of these employees cannot be ignored. I have also noted that letters sent to officials in the Speaker’s Office did not give an option of redeployment, rather, it summarily stated that the principal opted to release the employee and she elected to impose the early settlement option. Given the reasons above I can only assume that employees were arbitrarily dismissed without any consideration for their rights and well-being. In this regard, it is reprehensible that a party which claims to be for the people, is firing employees arbitrarily without consideration for their rights and well-being. This despite the fact that your MMC Offices are apparently intending to increase their staff complements from 4 to 9.  Cadre deployment at its best; draining state resources to reward party loyalty. Failure to pay salaries The next issue pertains to the failure of your Administration to pay out salaries to these officials who have been dismissed. I was informed by officials that they did not receive their salaries on the 27 January 2020. Upon receiving these complaints, I immediately sought clarity from the City Manager as to how and why this occurred. Councillor Makhubo, it is one thing to dismiss these officials for your political convenience, but it is wholly unacceptable on all levels to deny them their salaries for no reason whatsoever.eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-banner-1','ezslot_6',116,'0','0'])); January is a notoriously challenging month. Imagine going through the first month of the year with no salary? It was only after I made follow ups that some of these officials informed me that their salaries had been paid. I am aware that the workers who were insourced by the DA-Administration feel at risk at being outsourced once again to unscrupulous tenderpreneurs. What next? So what next? What harassment will these employees be further be subjected to? How much more insecurity do they need to suffer? What else will your administration inflict on them? I appeal to you to resist adding to the statistics of unemployment that the ANC has allowed to skyrocket. It should be clear to you and your administration that the DA will not sit idle while all the good work that was done is unraveled; nor will we be silent while vulnerable employees are abused and discarded aside. We call on you to commit to being an administration that serves all people, including all of those in the City’s employ. Sincerely Issued by Funzi Ngobeni, Caucus Leader Democratic Alliance: City of Johannesburg Caucus, Joburg Regional Chairperson, 29 January 2020