AFRICAN NATIONAL CONGRESS SECRETARY’S GENERAL OFFICE Decisions of the NEC meeting held on 6-8 December 2020eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_2',112,'0','0'])); The National Executive Committee sat in an ordinary virtual session on 6-8 December 2020. The Political Overview by President Cyril Ramaphosa, and the NWC Report by Secretary General Ace Magashule, formed the main basis of the discussions. The NEC also received inputs on the Covid 19 pandemic, on implementation of the Economic Transformation and Recovery Plan, on International matters, on the Guidelines for Selelection of Local Government Candidates and the ANC Electoral Committee and on preparations for January 8, 2021. The NEC welcomed the Political Overview and NWC Report, which together provided an overview on progress on key tasks set out in our January 8, 2020 statement, on the state of organisation and on the implementation of decisions of the NEC. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_4',113,'0','0']));Both inputs reaffirmed the mandate of 54th National Conference to the National Executive Committee as organisational renewal and unity, to restore the relationship between the ANC and the people, its integrity and role as agent for change and leader in society and the objective of radical socio-economic transformation. The NEC held robust discussions over the three days on these matters, and resolved as follows: On the Scourge of Gender based Violence and Femicide and Violence against Children, the NEC: 1. Appreciated the campaigning by ANC structures, the ANC Women’s League and various sectors of our society to raise awareness, champion the cause of victims of GBV and femicide, outrage at violence against children, and address the underlying causes of gender-based violence during this year. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_5',114,'0','0']));2. Acknowledged the specific focus on the role of men and boys in combatting gender-based violence, in fighting against the patriarchal and sexist attitudes and practices that justify and create the environment for gender-based violence and violence and abuse of children to flourish. The NEC welcomed the dialogues and engagements with and amongst men and boys on these issues. 3. Noted that all the efforts and activities throughout the year culminated in the 16 Days of Activism, with its heightened awareness raising on what needs to be done, and that indeed we shall continue with the battle against gender-based violence and for the safety of all children, for each of the 365 days of the coming year and beyond. 4. Noted work in government towards implementation of the National Strategic Plan on Gender-based Violence and Femicide, and the establishment and resourcing of structures to implement this Action plan. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_3',115,'0','0']));5. Appreciated the steps during the South African Chairship of the African Union to ensure that women’s empowerment is on the agenda of our continental union, and welcomed the decision of the just-concluded Special Extraordinary AU Summit, that a high level event on Gender-based Violence would be held before the next Ordinary Summit of the AU in February 2021; 6. Recommited the ANC to continue the struggle to build a non-sexist society, including addressing violence against women in our ranks where it rears its ugly head; the financial and economic inclusion and empowerment of women; vetting of ANC public reprsentatives on their records on GBV, and implementation of the Gender budgeting framework by the Women’s Ministries across government and in all spheres. On the COVID 19 Pandemic, on Preventing a deadly Second Wave 7. The NEC noted the briefing by the President, the Minister of Health Dr Zweli Mkhize and the Minister of COGTA Dr Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma on the work done by government through the National Coronavirus Command Council and Cabinet on the Coronavirus Pandemic, based on our multipronged approach. 8. Expressed grave concern about the increase in infections and deaths over the last few weeks, in particular in the hotspots areas of E Cape and W Cape, and welcomed the measures announced by the President in his last address to the nation, in order to arrest this situation. eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-banner-1','ezslot_1',116,'0','0']));9. Appreciated the work done by ANC branches, public representatives, by community-based organisations and civil society to raise awareness, and mobilise community solidarity during the difficult situation caused by the pandemic. 10. Noted with concern that many countries across the world are experiencing a second wave of the pandemic, with deadly and devastating effects on their populations and economies, and that we need to do all in our power to prevent a second wave in South Africa. 11. The NEC called on all South Africans to heed the call by the President, to “change our behaviour now to prevent a resurgence of the virus and manage outbreaks where they occur,” so that we balance saving lives and saving livelihoods. 12. Further call on the structures of the ANC to continue to take the lead in providing information to communities about the pandemic, using local and community radio stations, print media and social media to appeal to each community at ward level to adhere to Covid-19 regulations during the festive season. In particular, to avoid parties and large crowds, and to restrict family gatherings, to wear a mask at all times, wash hands and keep social distance, and to protect the elderly and very young from frequent contact. 13. Acknowledged the ongoing social and economic impacts of the pandemic, and vow to continue to build national and local social compacting around the implementation of the Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan, the provision of basic services, job creation and infrastructure development, as well as social relief to combat hunger and poverty. 14. Noted the united stance of the African continent in the fight against Covid-19, through the African Union, the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, working with the World Health Organisation, and supports the call by the AU Chairperson, President Ramaphosa, that Africa must build her capacity for research, innovation and local manufacturing, so that never again, whether with regards to essential medicines and medical equipment, or a vaccine, it is so dependent on others, that it fails her citizens. 15. Noted the initiatives by government to participate in the African vaccine trials initiative, to acquire vaccine stock for South Africans, and confirmed the need to have further discussions on the issue of access to and distribution of a Covi-19 vaccine, for when it becomes available. The NEC called for expediting of Conference resolution on the establishment of a state-owned pharmaceutical company, as part of the Africa-wide drive to ensure greater self-reliance of its citizens to access critical medical supplies. 16. The NEC further takes note of the global inequities in a profit driven pharmaceutical sector, that that there are a range of initiatives to develop and produce therapeutic agents and vaccines, including by allies such as Cuba and fellow BRICS members and to work with all on a non-ideological basis to ensure South Africans have access to effective and affordable therapeutic agents and vaccines. On ANC Credibility and Integrity, dealing with Corruption, the NEC 17. Recommitted to the implementation of the resolutions of 54th National Conference, acknowledging that corruption, factionalism, social distance and dishonesty, contradict our mission and damage our capacity to serve the people and use the country’s resources to achieve development and transformation. These are decisions of the supreme decision-making structure of the ANC and reflect the will of branches of the ANC; the NEC is therefore is charged with considering how best to achieve the implementation of all resolutions, in the context of concrete conditions prevailing at the time. 18. Reaffirmed the position taken at its meeting of 31 July to 2 August 2020 that the ANC needs to draw a clear line in the sand between the organisation, and those who steal and commit other crimes against the people. Also reaffirmed the decisions on the steps towards implementation of Conference resolution, as agreed at its meeting on 28 – 30 August 2020 and communicated by the Officials through the NEC Statement after this meeting. The NEC stressed that there can be no retreat from the positions taken and these decisions be implemented for all members. 19. Further recalled the NGC of 2015 resolution, strengthened by the 54th National Conference, that “the ANC should strengthen consequence management system against comrades who participate or are found guilty of corruption”; and that the ANC should take decisive action against all members involved in corruption, including those who use money to influence conference outcomes and those who try to subvert the membership system. 20. The NEC noted legal opinions soliciting by Officials. While technical legal opinions are important as background information; as a voluntary organisation the ANC follows its Constitution, Rules, Conference resolutions and NEC decisions, and operates within the Constitution and laws of the land. 21. Urged the Officials to consider the political imperatives and intentions of Conference, as well as the legal opinions, and in the interests of consistency and uniformity, finalise the Step-aside Guidelines for the organisation as a whole, for consideration and adoption by the NEC at the beginning of 2021. 22. The NEC stressed, in dealing with matters of integrity and the fight against corruption, that remedial action should be applied in an even-handed manner to members at every level of the organisation. It noted that inconsistent application of Rules and the Constitution of the ANC, undermines the unity of the movement. The ANC should uphold the rights of all members and protect the integrity of the movement, without fear or favour. 23. Urged the SGO and Treasurer General to continue to work with the Integrity Commission to ensure that it, including the Chairperson, is provided with the necessary resources to carry out their responsibilities. 24. The NEC further noted the report of Officials on the charges against the ANC Secretary General, and welcomed the SG’s decision to voluntarily present himself to the Integrity Commission on 12 December 2020. The Officials will process the outcomes of this engagement and the determination of the Integrity Commission, and report to the NWC and NEC. 25. Condemned in the strongest terms the actions by some members and leaders, who were seen burning ANC regalia outside the court where the SG appeared in Mangaung, as well as making inflammatory and divisive statements. The NEC called on leaders and members to exercise maximum discipline and to refrain from actions and utterances that detract from the spirit of renewal and unity. 26. Recalled the Conference support for a Commission on State Capture, appreciated the work of the Zondo Commission under very difficult circumstances, often painful to the ANC, and reaffirm the call to all members to cooperate with the Commission. It called on everybody to refrain from unnecessary attacks on the person of the Deputy Chief Justice, and the work he has been tasked to perform by the nation. 27. Notes the request from cde Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula to get the report from the Integrity Commission on her presentation to the Commission, and for an opportunity for her to meet with Officials regarding the matter. ON THE STATE OF ORGANISATION The NEC appreciated the comprehensive report on the State of Organisation, including detailed provincial and League reports which were distributed. The NEC therefore: On BBGM’s, Regional and Provincial Conferences 28. Adopted the recommendations from the NWC that Branch Biennale General Meetings, Regional Conferences and Provincial Conferences due, be held not later than 30 April 2021, ratified the cut-off date for members to renew as 15 December 2020 and welcomed the social media campaign to encourage members to register on the system, to check their status and renew their membership. 29. Emphasised the NEC decision that no structures should be disbanded. This decision has been communicated to all secreretaries and coordinators. 30. BBGMs should be prioritized, so that they do not coincide with the local government candidates selections processes. 31. All branches, regions and provinces whose conferences are already due or whose mandates come to an end in 2021, must be allowed to have their Provincial and Regional Conferences by the due date of 30 April 2021, in compliance with the Constitution. Provinces and Regions whose term expires beyond May 2021 shoud not be disbanded during the local government election campaign, rather their term should be extended. 32. Ensure that Branches and regions are assisted to develop roadmaps towards their BBGMs and Regional Conferences and to activate dispute resolutions committees at all levels, as per the Constitution’s provisions, to ensure problems are resolved expeditiously. The SGO and Organising to monitor and assist in the process at all levels. 33. Implement special efforts to strengthen ANC metro organisation, ahead of elections, through Organising and Elections structurers. On the North West 34. Urge the NWC and Deployees to process reports, and to return to Northwest to engage branches and regions, on the matters raised during the previous engagements, as per the NWC Report. This includes supporting and strengthening the IPC, in line with its mandate and powers as set by the NEC. 35. The SGO together with the IPC, Organising and L&G committee to engage the ANC caucuses in Madibeng and JB Marks regarding the motions of no-confidence moved by the DA. 36. The recommendations of a team led by the SGO, including the Minister of CoGTA, the Chair of the L&G Sub-committee, NEC Deployees, after engaging the IPC and deployees in municipalities, must be implemented. On NEC Deployees to Provinces 37. NEC deployees to various provinces will be reinforced, including to the North West. 38. The NEC in the strongest terms condemned the threats against Cde M Kubayi-Ngubane, against other deployees and members of the ANC. On the Rebuilding of the ANC Youth League 39. The NEC welcomed the report from the National Youth Task Team, and the engagements by Officials and NWC with the NYTT on progress to rebuild the ANC Youth League. 40. The NEC affirmed the need for a radical and militant ANCYL, led by young people, able to advance the twin tasks of the League: (1) to unite and lead young people in confronting and dealing with problems facing the youth; and (2) to ensure that the youth make a full and rich contribution to the work of the ANC and the life of the nation. 41. The NEC therefore: a) Requested the NWC to consider the detailed report and Roadmap towards the National Congress of the ANC Youth League, to be held by no later than end of March 2021; b) Tasked the Officials and NWC to strengthen the NYTT as necessary, with emphasis on YL members under 35 years of age. On the call for ANC Members to Check their Membership Status and Renew 42. The NEC appreciated progress with the implementation of a mondernised, online Membership system, and the current status of ANC members in the system, numbering over 1.4 million members. 43. Noted that there are still a large number of members who need to renew their membership by the cut-off date of 15 December 2020, and call on all members to register on the system, to check their status and to renew their membership by the cut-off date, in order to participate in critical organizational processes in 2021. On Local Government and Basic Services, and Elections next year 44. Notes the report on work done in preparations for Local Government Elections, and for the by-elections. 45. Congratulates ANC structures for the work done under difficult circumstances due to the pandemic, to ensure branches and communities select candidates for the by-elections and to mobilise and get out the vote on voting days. On the Alliance 46. The NEC welcomed the regular engagements and meetings of the Alliance Secretariat and Political Council (APC), which are critical towards ensuring common approaches to the transformation project and a common Alliance programme of action. 47. It further noted the specific issues raised by Alliance structures, including the common approach to the Covid 19 pandemic, the crisis facing SOEs, proposals for non-trading days, Energy security, the formation of an Alliance Economics task team, local government candidate selction process and other matters in the report of the NWC to the NEC. It urged Officials to be seized with these matters at the level of the APC, including the engagements on the Reconfiguration of the Alliance as one of the NGC discussion papers, and implementation of the non-trading days resolution of the APC. 48. Agreed that the ANC must be involved in discussions on the public sector wage bill and agreement, in the context of the fiscal and economic challenges. On the MDM and Civil Society 49. The NEC expressed its supports for the work in progress and the approach taken by the SGO, working with Alliance partners, to build unity of COSAS and SANCO. 50. Congratulates SASCO and the Progressive Youth Alliance on progress in organizing and mobilizing students at higher education institutions, and in winning a number of SRC elections this year. 51. Welcomes the engagements with lawyers and academics and organized agriculture regarding rural safety and the development and transformation of the agricultural sector. 52. Urged the Task Team led by the Deputy President to meet with Contralesa on matters of common concern. 53. Supported work to engage with the LGBTQI+ community, the struggle to end discrimination based on sexual orientation, and to promote the involvement, visibility and participation of the sector in the movement and in society. On Outstanding TRC matters 54. The NEC noted the engagement by the team led by the DSG with the Foundation for Human Rights and Families of Victims on the outstanding apartheid era crimes from the TRC process and ratifies the formation of a joint team to pursue these matters. 55. Reaffirms the ANC’s firm support for the outstanding TRC matters of investigations, prosecutions, as well as reparations to be given urgent attention in pursued of transitional justice, in order to give closure and justice to families of victims of apartheid era crimes, including crimes against humanity as part of the process of national healing. 56. Requests the team in para 54, to urgently brief the NWC on the matters of repatriation and reparations, and progress on the outstanding TRC matters. On Discipline 57. The NEC once again condemns the public spats and public pronouncements by ANC leaders, in violation of its Communications Protocol. It calls on all NEC members to desist from such actions, as they fuel divisions, undermine the brand of the ANC and the capacity of the NEC to give leadership to structures and to society, as a coherent and cohesive force. 58. Officials should continue to call out such comrades to make them aware of their wrong behaviour, and if they persist, to consider disciplinary measures in line with the Constitution. On celebration of January 8, 2021 59. The NEC notes the recommendation on January 8 celebration, presented by head of Organising, cde Nomvula Mokonyane and resolved that it be held in Limpopo province as per the practice of rotation. 60. It appreciates the recommendations on the format of the celebrations, to reach out to the people across the country on this day, in a manner that is in line with the Covid 19 disaster regulations. 61. The NEC also discussed and contributed to the framework for the January 8 statement, as presented by the Chair of the Policy Committee, cde Jeff Radebe. MK veterans unity process 62. The NEC notes progress and challenges with regards to the unity process, and urge National Officials to urgently engage the Peace & Stability Sub-committee and to hold joint meetings with MKMVA and MK Council, in order to break the current deadlock towards the holding of a unified conference of MK veterans early in 2021. 63. The NEC will on 16 December 2020, reflect on the role of MK, as we celebrate Day of Reconciliation, and ahead of the 60th anniversary of the formation of Umkhonto we Sizwe in 2021. ON IMPLEMENTATION OF THE ECONOMIC RECOVERY & TRANSFORMATION PLAN The National Executive Committee received the report on progress with regards to the implementation of the Economic Transformation and Recovery Plan from cde Enoch Godongwane on behalf of the Economic Transformation Committee and: 64. Reaffirms the focus of the Economic Recovery Plan, namely (a) An Infrastructure Development led recovery plan with new investments in energy; water and sanitation; roads and bridges; human settlements, health and education; digital infrastructure and public transport; achieving significant job creation multipliers, with emphasis on localisation, including maximising the use of South African materials and construction companies and labour-intensive methods; and mass employment opportunities through public employment programmes. (b) As a second pillar, investments in key productive sectors, such as agriculture, manufacturing, mining and tourism and other services; and decisive progress in telecommunications reform to reduce data costs for households and firms. Similarly, the growth and job creation potential of energy-related investments, including green industries to be fully harnessed, through local production linked to the country’s energy investment programme, as required in the Integrated Resource Plan. 65. The NEC observes persistent challenges as we implement the Recovery plan, in particular constraints in the tourism and real-estate sectors; shortages of raw materials and equipment; and the threat of a second round of lockdown measures globally that could further inhibit domestic recovery. 66. The NEC noted with concern the deteriorating fiscal situation faced by the country, with debt payments absorbing a growing share of limited public resources, increasingly crowding out spending on social and economic investment. Debt-service costs now stands at 4.8 per cent of GDP, up from 3.3 per cent in 2016/17. It also notes the deteriorating government balance sheet, including state-owned companies and municipalities struggling to pay salaries, pay for maintenance, basic services and other operational costs. 67. Welcomes progress with implementation of key interventions as part of the Economic Recovery plan, including work to restore Energy Security through the Integrated Resource Plan; the Mass Employment Programme; Industrialisation and growing the productive economy; mobilizing Infrastructure investment; Telecoms sector reforms; Green Economy Interventions and other key interventions; as well as social compacting on the Plan and other sectoral initiatives with all stakeholders . 68. The NEC in its discussions emphasized the importance of the economic empowerment of women, and attention to local economic development in the context of the district development model. 69. The NEC also took note of the Quarter 3 GDP statistics released on 8 December 2020 by Statistics South African, welcoming the nascent signs of recovery, and therefore the need to stay the course and speed up implementation of the Recovery and Transformation plan. 70. Therefore decided that the Economic Recovery and Transformation Plan, and all initiatives that form part of the plan, shall be discussed in detail at the NEC Lekgotla in January 2021. ON CANDIDATE SELECTION FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND THE ANC ELECTIONS COMMITTEE 71. The NEC welcomed the report from Dr. David Masondo, with cde Beatie Hofmeyr on the Guidelines for Local Government Candicate Selection and the ANC Electoral Committee, and particularly appreciated consultations with various structures on these guidelines. 72. Notes the concerns raised by various structures, including the importance of ensuring that the processes remain true to our principle of gender equality. 73. Adopts the report, Candidate Selection Guidelines and recommendations on the Role and Composition of the Electoral Committee, and urges the Officials to engage Alliance partners on their inputs, before finalisation. ON INTERNATIONAL MATTERS 74. The NEC welcomed the comprehensive report by Cdes Naledi Pandor and Lindiwe Zulu on the key global trends which impact on South Africa’s foreign policy, the anticipated changes in South African missions abroad, and the updates and progress reports on the following matters: - The impact of South Africa’s Chairship of the African Union during 2020. - Outcomes of the AU Executive Council, in particular South African candidicacy for the AU Commission, the adoption of the 2021 AU Budget, support for the DRC Chairship of the AU in 2021, the AU theme for 2021, the resourcing of the AU Peace Fund and operationalization of the African Standby Force. - The Midyear AU Bureau meeting with the RECs and the Extraordinary AU Summit on the implementation of the African Free Trade Area which wil begin trading in January 2021. - The issue of the Taipei Liason office and its location. - Conference resolution and action on the SA Embassy in Israel - Negotiations between Ethiopia, Egypt and Sudan on the Great Ethiopian Renaissance Dam, convened by the AU Chairperson - Silencing the Guns and Promote Peace, Stability and Development with reference to DRC, Mozambique insurgency, and Zambia Sovereign debt default. 75. The NEC urged the International Committee to remain seized with these matter, and for the committee to prepare a report to the January Lekgotla on the issues of party to party relations, solidarity campaigns, including the creation of a liberation movement political school. On the SABC 76. The NEC appreciated the report by the Communications committee on an approach to ensure that the SABC as a public broadcaster is strengthened, in an entirely new environment, and defer the decision on the draft resolution to be tabled at the NEC Lekgotla in January 2021. OTHER MATTERS 77. The NWC is requested to consider resuming physical meetings of the NEC and holding the NGC on hybrid basis in May 2021. 78. The NEC recommits to continue to work for greater unity at national, provincial and local levels, and to continues our focus on the comprehensive implementation of all National Conference resolutions and of the 2019 Election Manifesto. THE END 