NEHAWU not shocked by announcement of a second wave of Covid-19 infections 10 December 2020 The National Education, Health and Allied Workers’ Union (NEHAWU) is not shocked by the announcement made by the Minister of Health, Dr.Zwelini Mkhize, that the country has entered a second wave of COVID-19 infections. On the 24th November 2020 during our Community Healthcare Workers (CHWs) strike we highlighted the skyrocketing daily infection rate and warned of an impending second wave. At that time, the number of people needing hospitalisation grew astronomically on a daily basis and hospital beds had totally ran out in the Nelson Mandela Bay area in the Eastern Cape. Furthermore, the national union also highlighted the unpreparedness of our healthcare system to deal with a second wave of infections. We strongly believe that the announcement by the Minister is a bit delayed because the recent surge has already been putting more strain on our members and workers who are overworked because of understaffing, inadequate Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs) and medicines. On the 1st December 2020 the leadership of the national union visited the Witbank Hospital in Emalahleni, in Mpumalanga and what it found at that hospital was saddening to say the least. A single nurse was responsible for four wards because her colleagues were at home quarantining after being exposed to the virus. The wards were dirty and looked like they had not been cleaned in a long while. The situation at the Witbank hospital is not an isolated incident as most of our members across the country are still complaining about the intermittent supply of quality Personal Protective Equipment (PPEs), understaffing and non-compliance with the Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) Act. The shortcomings and inadequacies by hospitals and clinics were highlighted in our fact-finding mission report of our National Office Bearers (NOB’s) which was widely shared by the national union. As NEHAWU, we hold a strong view that if the recommendations of the fact-finding mission report were implemented we would not find ourselves in such a dire situation as the country. Once more we believe that it would be very tragic if many people lose their lives because the department elected to ignore the recommendations made by the report. As announced by our Central Executive Committee (CEC) which was convened on the 7th to the 8th December 2020 the union will continue to monitor the situation with hawk eyes and encourage our members and workers not to work if their lives are in danger. Furthermore, we will compel the Department of Employment of Employment and Labour to act harshly against employers who do not comply with the OHS Act and recklessly expose workers to the virus, if that fails then the union will do everything at its disposal even considering to approach courts in defence of its members and workers in general. As directed by the CEC the national union will also intensify its call for the impact training and recruitment of more labour inspectors. The health and safety of our members and workers remains our main priority and we are more than prepared to fight tooth and nail to guarantee their safety. Just yesterday, a total of 6709 new infections were recorded and soon more people will need hospitalisation and medical care. Once more our members and workers who are frontline workers will be expected to go beyond the call of duty to treat and care for the infected despite the fatigue and depression that they are going through since the first recorded positive COVID-19 case on the 5th March 2020. These are the same workers who are yet to receive their salary increase which was due on the 1st April 2020 and supposedly given incentives as a form of appreciating their scarifies of putting their lives and families in favour of saving the lives of South Africans. In this regard, we call on our government to do the right thing and pay these workers and all public servants their salary increase with immediate effect as they are dejected by the uncaring nature of our government including giving frontline workers their deservingly incentives for the sacrifice demonstrated in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. We want to highlight to government that these workers are low on morale and if we are to wage a serious war against the invisible enemy then we must motivate our soldiers by paying them what is due to them, their salary increase and also consider a danger allowance or incentive as well. Lastly, we want to appeal to our people in the country, especially in the Eastern Cape, Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal and the Western Cape to be more cautious and avoid getting infected by the virus by applying and complying with all COVID-19 regulations meant to manage the spread of this virus in order to save their lives, particularly, during this time of the second waves and festive season. Let’s all do what is necessary and celebrate the festive holidays wisely including respecting our lives as South Africans. At this point, we take this opportunity to wish all our members and workers of this country a merry Christmas and prosperous new year and also assure those who will be in the line of duty during the festive season that your union, NEHAWU, will be with you at all material times in defending and protecting your rights as human beings responsible for improving the living conditions and lives of people of this country in particular the working class and the poor. Issued by Khaya Xaba, National Spokesperson, NEHAWU, 10 December 2020