Two Doctors reflecting on the same intractable problem Nothing characterises South Africa's history so much as the virtual absence of debate between white and black or white and coloured leaders and opinion-formers about the best way South Africa could overcome the backwardness and poverty of all its peoples. Leaders of the different racial communities virtually never met to discuss the racial question, universities remained segregated until fairly recently. I know of only one occasion on which a debate on South Africa’s racial problem did take place between leading intellectuals from different sides of the racial divide. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_3',112,'0','0'])); It happened in 1935 when Dr. H.F. Verwoerd (1901-1966) and Dr. Abdullah Abdurahman (1872-1940) exchanged views before the Commission of Enquiry into the state of the coloured community that sat under the chairmanship of Professor R.W. Wilcocks, Professor of Psychology at the University of Stellenbosch. At age 64 Dr. Abdurahman was then twice the age Verwoerd and much better known publicly. He was a member of the Wilcocks Commission and was widely regarded as the person most knowledgeable about the coloured community. In Martin Plaut’s fascinationg book that has just appeared Dr Abdullah Abdurahman: South Africa First Elected Black Politician (Jacana) the remarkable story of this man and his career is told in an absorbing way. His grandparents were slaves in the Cape who had succeeded in buying their own freedom through the proceeds of the extensive trading in which they were engaged. Their descendants also prospered and Abdullah was sent for five years to Glasgow University to qualify as a medical doctor. Back in Cape Town after graduating he soon became a leading figure in the African Political Organisation, which was founded in 1902 to promote the interests of the communities who were not white and in particular the coloured community. He campaigned for equal work and the eradication of the divisions between white and coloured people. He was a member of delegations that lobbied against the different forms of racial discrimination that were incorporated in the Constitution and the legislation of the new state. Dr Verwoerd studied at the University of Stellenbosch from which he received a doctoral degree at the age of 23. In 1925–27 he visited some German and US universities on a post-doctoral study tour. German academic life did not make any particular impression on him, but he returned from the United States impressed with the work social scientists were doing. By the mid-1930s many leading South Africans had developed such a fascination with the United States that Lord Hailey noted in his diary, ‘South Africa regards itself as the USA in the making.’[1] Verwoerd would be no exception in thinking that South Africa could become a dynamic state that could successfully address major problems like poverty and racial conflict through research and planning. He adopted the positivist approach of the time that rejected speculative thought in favour of research based on empirical inquiry, the identification of social patterns, and the drafting of legislation that anticipated future trends.eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_1',115,'0','0']));eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_2',115,'0','1'])); Back in Stellenbosch Verwoerd was appointed professor of psychology in 1927 and professor of sociology in 1931. He soon turned his attention to the so-called ‘poor white’ problem that had begun to dominate the national agenda. It was to a large degree an Afrikaner problem. The number of Afrikaner poor was put at 250 000, or a quarter of the Afrikaner population. Verwoerd made his name nationally by his speech to the Volkskongres on the problem held in 1934 in Kimberley. In his analysis he put a premium on the role of the state in targeted intervention, particularly in establishing a department of social work and providing for the professional training of social workers. The state had to coordinate its activities with those of local organisations founded to promote social welfare and health. In 1935 Verwoerd was invited by the Wilcocks Commission to give expert evidence to the commission. He first made his name in the early by researching the so-called poor white problem that was rife among the Afrikaners. On a visit to several universities in the United States he was particularly impressed by the work done at some universities to pre-empt major problems like poverty and social conflict through research and planning. Verwoerd dismissed the idea of biological differences among the ‘big races’. He observed that what appeared to be differences in skills in the case of Europeans and Africans were simply differences in culture due to historical experience. In 1935 Verwoerd, then 34 years old testified before the Wilcocks commission that researched social conditions in the coloured community. Abdurahman was then 63 years old. He had to endure mounting criticism from younger black intellectuals because he was not radical enough and tried to address coloured poverty and social exclusion in a pragmatic way. During the time the commission sat Abdurahman impressed everyone with the sharp and penetrating questions.eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-banner-1','ezslot_0',116,'0','0'])); An exchange between Abdurahman and Verwoerd that took place before the Wilcocks Commission turned into a fascinating discussion about a policy which was still evolving into what later become known as apartheid. The exchange proceeded as follows: Dr Abdurahman: You have been speaking as if we ought to develop in groups. Would it be in the interests of South Africa to develop in three different groups? What will be the ultimate effect? Dr Verwoerd: That is difficult to answer. I think you can’t evade it. Dr A: What would be the ultimate relationship between the different classes? Dr V: Development side by side without clashing I think is possible. Dr A: Would it be possible to have that understanding in three different groups as you would have in any one group? Dr V: You would not. A certain amount of clash you will have. In the United States they try to look upon themselves as one group. In the Southern states the division is as strong as here. Dr A: I was thinking more of our political customs. You have three different groups, three different outlooks; are they not bound to clash? Dr V: They will clash. Dr A: You will in the end have a privileged and an unprivileged class. Would that be in the interests of South Africa, if we develop along those lines? Dr V: The full answer would be a mixture of races and I think that would be worse. Take Switzerland. You have three groups who are closer together and who do not mix than the groups in this country. Dr A: Where you have groups, is it not natural that you will have a superior and an inferior group? Dr V: The tendency will be so.[2] Verwoerd’s approach to the solution of poverty was anticipated in a lecture he gave a year earlier during a conference on poor whites in Kimberley. It reflects his desire to find a more purposeful and systematic way in which to tackle poverty. In his testimony before the Wilcocks Commission he placed an emphasis especially on coloured poverty in Cape Town and Stellenbosch. Today he is seen as someone interested in relieving only white poverty, but in this testimony one gets the impression of a researcher who saw white and coloured poverty as a single problem to be solved in a coordinated way by the state. He informed the commission that, together with his colleague Dr Wagner, he had undertaken a comprehensive investigation of poverty, dependency on state support, and juvenile crime among the white and brown people of Stellenbosch. He presented himself as qualified to speak with authority about the brown communities in these two towns. Verwoerd declared that the conditions of the coloured people in Stellenbosch were “definitely” better than in Cape Town, even though there were also slum neighbourhoods in the former. Research in his department showed that the coloured people of Stellenbosch were far better off as far as housing and school attendance were concerned. Compared to Cape Town there were hardly any juvenile offenders. Only now and then did young boys appear before the courts. Like the poor whites, the brown people in the town were quite willing to help one another. According to figures presented by Verwoerd, the income of coloured people in Stellenbosch was lower than that in Cape Town. Income (per month) in Cape Town and Stellenbosch Under £3           £3–£5                  £5 plus Stellenbosch (brown people)         35%                     25%                     40% Cape Town (brown people)            22.5%                  29%                     48.5% Cape Town (Malay)                          14%                   19%                      67% Verwoerd recommended a single department of state welfare to deal with white and coloured poverty in a way that saw the two as interwoven. Before something could be done for one group, one must first look at how it would influence the other. The man who later would become known for his insistence on principled policies gave a different answer when asked if the policy had to be one of segregation or equal opportunity for white and coloured people. His answer was: “I believe you can’t lay down a concrete principle. Sometimes you must differentiate because you cannot always provide the same thing for both.” Verwoerd argued that cheap black labour was busy pushing out coloured labour in the building sector and other industries. Coloured workers, in turn, were doing the same to half-educated whites. He wanted black labourers to be kept out of the Western Cape. They had to find work in the reserves or on the mines. He added that the Transkei would be able to carry its current population and their descendants for the next fifty years if the necessary improvements in agriculture were brought about. Here we have the policy of apartheid starting to take shape. But the word apartheid would only be heard in Parliament for the first time in 1944. Hermann Giliomee’s latest book The Afrikaners: A Concise History (Tafelberg) was published earlier this year. A version of this article first appeared on Martin Plaut’s weblog. [1] Roberta Millar, ‘Science and Society in the early career of HF Verwoerd’, Journal4, 1993, p. 646. [2] This is an edited version of the exchange. For the full text see US Library, R.W. Wilcocks collection, MS 77/17/3 (3/806 to 3/817), Commission of Enquiry re the Cape Coloured Population of the Union, Evidence, vol. 3: Professor Hendrik Verwoerd, Stellenbosch, interviewed at Cape Town, 23 August 1935, pp. 2941–2952. 