Media Statement from the Office of the Minister of Police 16 December 2020 The Police Minister, General Bheki Cele has noted with concern, the reckless behaviour exhibited by some bathers on Cape Town’s beaches that fly in the face of the country’s efforts to curb the spread of COVID-19. On the first public holiday since the announcement of stricter measures by President Cyril Ramaphosa, Minister Cele led a walk about along with the Deputy Minister of Police Mr Cassel Mathale and SAPS top officials, to inspect compliance of #COVID19 regulations on beaches in the City of Cape Town. The entourage visited Camps Bay, Strand, Clifton, Munwabisi, Big Bay, Strandfontein, Macassar, Mnandi other beaches in and around the city. Cape Town beaches are permitted to open from 6am until 6pm under the recently revised regulations. Minister Cele interacted with bathers of the various beaches and expressed his gratitude for many of them who observed COVID-19 protocols. “The country’s first Reconciliation Day under Lockdown level 1 on our beaches was less busy than usual. Those that came out to swim, many did wear their masks and practiced social distancing. However as the day progressed, the numbers increased and in some beaches there was a total disregard of the health protocols which is worrying.” Minister Cele says he will use his observations during the walk about to make his contributions to the National Coronavirus Command Council. Meanwhile, an activity by a private company on the Camps Bay beach was shut down during the Minister’s walkabout. While it was permitted by the City of Cape Town, upon closer inspection, the production was not compliant with what is permitted on beaches, as stipulated on the COVID-19 regulations. According to the permit of the production company that was handed to the SAPS, the production would go against the very rules set out by the President which are clear on what is permitted on beaches and therefore could not be allowed to continue for now.” - Cele concluded. Issued byLirandzu Themba on behalf of Office of Minister of Police, 16 December 2020  