KZN Cabinet Review: Average performances as ANC factionalism and corruption take precedence in the face of Covid-19 15 December 2020 The process of compiling a KwaZulu-Natal (KZN) Cabinet Review (view here) has not been an easy task this year, given the unprecedented challenges as a result of the Covid-19 health pandemic. It would, however, be remiss of the Democratic Alliance (DA) not to conduct such an exercise, given our opposition mandate which is to ensure accountability from the ANC-led provincial executive. While the KZN Cabinet Review for 2020 is marked by average performances, the DA has acknowledged where Members of the Executive (MECs) have performed, often under extremely trying circumstances. Regrettably, one of these mediocre performances is from Premier SihleZikalala, who scores a ‘D’. At a time when our province required real leadership from the Premier and his Executive, it was largely missing. Instead, there was a continued focus on appeasing ANC factionalism evidenced by an unnecessary cabinet reshuffle and the redeployment of disgraced former eThekwini Mayor, Zandile Gumede, to the Legislature, in spite of a massive public outcry. This while the Premier’s own Department was bedevilled by continuous allegations of protectionism of ANC cadres and previously disgraced officials being re-appointed to positions of office. In perhaps the most damning lack of leadership during the year though, the Premier placed a complete ban on statistics for Covid-19 numbers across districts and municipalities, creating a blanket of silence on information critical for the management of the pandemic in these areas. Other instances where the Premier failed to provide leadership include the fact that there was little to no opportunity for opposition parties to hold the Executive to account, particularly during hard lockdown. While the Legislature itself did continue working, with virtual Sittings and portfolio committees, no provision was made for Motions - an important component of the oversight process. In addition, Members were left unable to have proper oversight over essential services which could possibly have prevented some of the governance failures. This is particularly relevant in respect of the shocking levels of corruption that emerged during the health pandemic, which saw rampant fraudulent and corrupt Covid-19 expenditure in the province. This as scandals such as the KZN Social Development Department’s 'blanket saga' made national headlines. Added to this were the numerous instances of fraud, corruption and maladministration within KZN’s provincial government Departments and municipalities, which managed to achieve some of the worst performances to date. While the Premier and his Executive did finally appoint an ad hoc committee - to deal with consequence management as a result of the many forensic audits in the province – an ANC Chairperson was appointed, effectively creating a situation where the ANC is left to monitor itself. Despite this, there were, however, some positive signs within the Executive this year, with the Office of the Speaker, under the leadership of Nontembeko Boyce, scoring a well-deserved ‘A’. The Speaker is followed closely by former Finance MEC, Ravi Pillay, with a ‘B’ score and the DA acknowledges his commitment to keeping our province financially afloat during trying times. The Speaker and former Finance MEC are followed by average performances from the vast majority of MECs – including the critical portfolio of Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs, under former MEC, Nomusa Dube-Ncube. Most damning though are that the poorest performances came from MECs in key areas including Health and Social Development, with both MECs scoring a dismal ‘E’. Despite the many challenges, the DA has worked hard this year, under difficult circumstances, to fulfil its mandate to the people of KZN. This included raising burning issues within the provincial Legislature and demanding answers on them from MECs, with 62% of all written parliamentary questions being submitted by the DA. As we head into what we all hope will be a better year, it remains clear that ANC factionalism is a very real threat to progress in our province. It is also clear that if our province is to work, then we must work together. This needs to begin with the Premier who needs to be more candid when it comes to decisions that affect the people of our province. As KZN’s real opposition voice, the DA remains committed to working to improve the lives of our people. Issued by Zwakele Mncwango,Leader of the DA in the KZN Legislature, 15 December 2020