Cabinet reshuffle exposes cracks in Gauteng ANC 2 December 2020 The reshuffle of the Gauteng provincial Cabinet by the Premier, David Makhura, has clearly exposed the cracks present in the ANC in the province. With the dismissal of Mr Bandile Masuku as MEC for Health, the ANC Youth League and the anti-Makhura faction in Gauteng prepared for battle. The clash culminated today in the appointment of Dr NomathembaMokgethi as MEC for Health and Mr Parks Tau as the new MEC for Economic Development, Agriculture and Environment. According to media reports, the Youth League made it very difficult for the Premier to consider ANC members from outside the Legislature as candidates for MEC positions because it would require some of the younger ANC Youth League members to resign as MPLs to make space for the so-called outsiders. Thus far, the Youth League members have refused to resign so as to afford the veterans an opportunity to return because in the Youth League's view, the youth must be promoted instead. Nonetheless, Premier Makhura announced that he is going to appoint Parks Tau, who is currently serving as Deputy Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (COGTA), as MEC. Furthermore, Masuku's supporters made it clear that they are going to oust Premier Makhura with the ANC's 2022 election conference. The FF Plus has taken note of these intrigues, which will probably weaken the ANC's position even more in the runup to the 2021 local government elections, and the party will also keep a close eye on the two new MECs as they are filling important positions. Dr Mokgethi is tasked with managing a very difficult portfolio that has to deal with the Covid-19 pandemic on top of the ordinary challenges associated with a failing public healthcare system. As former Mayor of Johannesburg, Mr Tau was not very successful at bringing about economic development and, thus, there exists some doubt as to whether he is the right person to turn the struggling Gauteng economy around even though he has a lot of experience in economic portfolios As always, the FF Plus will fulfil its role as responsible and effective opposition to ensure that the MECs are held accountable. Issued by Anton Alberts, FF Plus national chairperson and MPL: Gauteng, 2 December 2020 