It’s been four long years since you could travel, and now, it’s time to unshackle yourself from the constraints of Covid-19. A friend owns a hillside backpackers and eco-lodge. It’s close to everything in Ballito, a sand-in-your-toes jungle in KwaZulu-Natal, among the high-rises. He says, “Ouma, it sounds like you need to come chill by the sea.” Your heart skips a beat. The sea! The taxi driver drops you at the bristling Park Station, apparently the centre of abductions and human trafficking in Johannesburg. You bear your walking stick, and the scurrying trolley touts and vociferous wrap-your-luggage vendors can’t match its boisterous swats. They converge, only to jump and flee, chased by your dirty looks. You collect your ticket, booked online at a 15 percent discount: R357 for a 12-hour journey of multiple stops. There are eventually about 20 of us onboard the double-decker and only the toilet and air-conditioning work. There’s no advertised WiFi, music, TV. “They haven’t been connected,” says the seated driver sipping his take-away coffee. “This is one of our first trips since lockdown.” It’s hot, like a sauna, in the bus, and nobody else is wearing a mask or sanitising. You settle in on the top deck, in the front row, far away from the other passengers. It’s a special request. The huge window draws in the outside, no fresh air. The 8.15am departure is delayed “due to technical problems”. You open your cooler bag, and enjoy a homemade egg and mayo sandwich. At 9am, the Behemoth to Ballito lurches onto a rampart and your sandwiches lurch into disarray. You almost fall off your seat as the juggernaut thumps back onto the road. What was in that coffee? The aircon’s on now, but that means water drips onto your feet. C’est la vie. You’ve done your research and primed yourself for the three-province journey; Gauteng, Mpumalanga, KZN. You’re going to hug the Eswatini border and travel more than 500 kilometres through towns raised on mining, agriculture, and social engineering; the progeny of the 1800s gold rush, the Afrikaner pioneers, the Voortrekkers, and the erstwhile National Party. First stop, Brakpan. Your eyes scour the horizon. You’re excited. Where is the famous mine dump that, at 120 metres, is double the height of Menkaure (61m), the shortest pyramid in the Giza complex, after Cheops (now 137m) and Giza (now 136.4m)? Where is this giant that rivals the last of the seven wonders of the ancient world? Alas, you’ll never know. Mist blinds your view, and clouds cling grimly to their greyness. By Springs, you’ve got one sarmie left, which is more than the bloke on his knees, in the middle of the road. He opens the trip’s catalogue of catastrophe. He’s chapter one of the Great Unravelling, Starvation. Zinc towns line the N17 to Secunda. The pylons are rusty. There’s a lot of Slash. Shake. Zip it and Run. The gaping potholes grin, mockingly. Foul chimney-stack smoke rises in the distance. The smog glimmers meaner than ice, and jets of red flame into the grey. The menace of pollution and shabbiness stalks your mood. Secunda, reeling under the onslaught of neglect, was named for taking second place to Sasolburg in the National Party’s rollout of Eskom development. It also witnessed two wishy-washy ANC bombings in 1980. But it’s ANC rule that’s done the real damage. Decrepit swathes of listless detritus exhale impunity. You’re pondering this when a passenger tries to sit next to you. “Sit there,” you say, pointing to the seats on the other side of the aisle. Lesley settles down, hoists her feet onto the front of the bus. She rummages in her bags. Jelly beans. “Can you believe the litter around here?” The trash doesn’t stop the alfresco cooking, and kiosk caravans abound, one has a big luxury car parked alongside. The capitalist survivors are oblivious to the ankle-deep junk and the dilapidated, broken buildings and, except for the mosques rising from the ruins, there is little that is pretty and clean. Shanty towns stretch, resplendent in their shiny new zinc, into the horror of a pending failed state. They’re line up, cheek by jowl, in Mpumalanga, deputy president DD Mabuza’s neck of the woods. Land is demarcated by stones or metres of fencing; but where are the people? There are brick houses too; mushrooming in the veld. Many boast ambitious porticos propped up by grand pillars. None are painted, East German style. Traditional architecture and building techniques survive in KZN, where wattle and daub, and thatch, prevail. A mangle of corrugated iron does not outnumber them, yet. Summer flowers, pretty things… they wave from slimy marshes. Remember me, they cry, brave tokens of resilience where guinea fowls scatter and rivers recoil, surrender to an onslaught of crap. Dry water courses sprout trees and grass. The trash can’t choke them, can’t shrink their purpose. If it weren’t for the ver verlate vlaktes, you’d swear you were travelling through a giant dump site. Bethal is the first farming town, en route, in the Gert Sibande District Municipality. Today, the legacy of this leader of the 1959 potato consumer boycott, and a treason trialist to boot, is celebrated by unkempt towns, and shacks and chickens squeezing into backyards. The Suid-Afrikaanse Vroue Federasie advertises social services. The road to Ermelo improves, and flamingos forage in a dam. You’ve seen Hurwitz Farming, Cassim Hassim Bonsmaras, coherence where the farmers are: ploughing and planting, good stands of trees, solid homes and sheds. First pit stop is Ermelo, where Sibande was born. It’s 12 noon and the driver taps his watch. There’s a stampede for fast food. You chew on a cigarette, a pensioner with no pension. Lesley comes back with a chicken salad, and the bus hisses into life. It dodges potholes and pigs. You imagine the landscape in the Middle Ages, when the Leghoya people built their corbelled homes, and construction of the roofs demanded a particular expertise. They were the first mining people on the Rand. Then, it’s onward, valiantly, to Piet Retief, renamed Mkhondo in 2010, after the Assegai River. Plantations thrive and the hills echo the story of uMgungundlovu, Dingane’s kraal. Did Retief and 100 others not know that, 10 years earlier, Dingane had taken out his half brother, Shaka? The 1838 Retief massacre, over a manifesto about land, bled into Zulu victory at Weenen, and then, the pivotal Battle of Blood River. Afrikaner nationalism consolidated in the Day of the Covenant, or as we know it today, the Day of Reconciliation, on December 16. Seemingly, nobody in Mkhondo cares that Piet Retief’s name is still emblazoned on, for example, schools and businesses. The impressive Moederkerk stands like a beacon across the road from the bus stop. It is well-maintained, pristine, unlike the rest of the town. You buy some braaied mielies, and pay R12. For locals, the price is R10. You see mountains, after you’ve seen red. Six hours to go. The landscape’s changing. Paulpietersburg welcomes you to KZN. It’s quite pretty, and there’s a turn-off to a place called Confidence. A sign points to a water bottler. A field of new graves is marked by mounds of orange earth at the turn-off. Vryheid. At last, some semblance of harmony. Edumbe Dam Park, shaded picnic sites, the hot springs at the Natal spa. Good water. Triple waters… carbonates, chlorides, sulphates, all at 40 deg Celsius at source. Vryheid, where the trekboers and Dinizulu collaborated to defeat a rival for land, but there are no public holidays to remind us of that. It’s 3pm. Drizzle dots the window, and wet children tramp along the verges, vulnerable to the grab-and-go monsters. Melmoth is next, the Gateway to the Zululand Highlands, and the supernatural Nkandla Forest, the largest remaining indigenous forest in Zululand. The Chube people, ironworkers said to have had magical powers, used the forest as a stronghold, and could not be conquered by Shaka. We pass through Empangeni, founded by the Norwegian Missionary Society. It’s raining now, steadily. A young man emerges from the mist. He raises a hand. He’s waving, right? Wrong! He throws a stone. It hits the window. Lesley’s jelly beans roll onto the floor. “My word, he threw that at you,” she says. You try not to feel uncomfortable, and scared, on the road to Richard’s Bay, the last stop for refreshments. Big, new houses dot opens fields, and there’s a bridge over a railway line, except the bridge goes nowhere. It’s got auburn tendrils of iron contorting into nowhere. It’s not connected to anything, except perhaps a tender. The stop at bustling, lit-up Richard’s Bay is brief. How it’s changed since 1965, when the National Party got a deep-sea harbour going there. One stop to go. Stanger-KwaDukuza, where Shaka was assassinated, indicates the start of the Zulu heritage route. You and Lesley say goodbye, shoot a selfie. Ballito, which means little ball, has grown. Soon, you’ll hear the sea. Route: Johannesburg in Gauteng, Brakpan, Springs; Evander in Mpumalanga, Secunda, Bethal, Ermelo, Piet Retief-Mkhondo; Paulpietersburg (KwaZulu-Natal), Vryheid, Melmoth, Empangeni, Richard’s Bay, Stanger-KwaDukuza, Ballito. 