MASHABA MUST ACCOUNT FOR UNLAWFUL AND IRREGULAR CONDUCT The City of Johannesburg welcomes the findings of the Public Protector following her investigation into several complaints raised against the City and its previous Executive Mayor, Herman Mashaba. The Public Protector investigated an anonymous complaint covering four distinct themes, namely; 1. Irregular staff appointments, 2. Irregular salary increases, 3. Financial mismanagement; and eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_5',113,'0','0'])); 4. Conflict of interest The Public Protector has made adverse findings against the former Executive Mayor in that he ‘unlawfully and irregularly’ meddled in the procurement processes of the City. Not only did the former Executive Mayor act illegally by meddling in procurement process of the city, he further influenced the City to divert funds intended for the support of youth drug rehabilitation programmes to the sole benefit of a non-governmental organization (NGO) with which he enjoyed close-links. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0'])); “The findings by the Public Protector are welcome and begin to complete the picture of how the City during the previous administration witnessed a peak in irregular expenditure reaching an all-time high of R 2, 4 billion. Lack of consequence management and impunity were the order of business.” “We have always maintained that the rhetoric and PR of the former Mayor were not in sync with the reality and objective facts on the City’s performance and stability. This is also backed by the reports of the Auditor-General,” said Mayor Makhubo. The Public Protector has also found that several senior appointments within the City were irregular including that of former Chief of Police, David Tembe. “Mr Tembe was improperly and irregularly appointed to the role of Chief of Police in the Johannesburg Metropolitan Police Department (JMPD). Again, this is further evidence of the complete disregard for law and process promoted by the former Mayor within the City.” “The PP findings are in line with our own understanding that Mr Tembe was never the most suitable and recommended candidate for the position. It is the former Mayor who parachuted him from being number five on the list of recommended candidates to being the preferred candidate for appointment.” Four capable candidates were overlooked in the interests of cronyism which is evidenced by the current position of the former Chief of Police within the political hopes of the former Mayor. “People were appointed to serve the Master and not the residents of Johannesburg. The residents have had to pay salaries to incompetent and unsuitable persons who were placed at the center of service delivery in the City.” Hundreds of millions have been lost due to the illegal decisions of Mr Tembe and the former Mayor to unlawfully graduate trainees of the JMPD without the regulated certified qualification and course completion. “As the City, we will be interacting further with the report and will move swiftly to abide by and implement its recommendations. We will also consider our options on possible legal proceedings to recover some of the monies paid to the irregular appointees and lost to the City” added Mayor Makhubo. Statement issued by the City of Joburg, 22 December 2020 