Three Social Development MECs in one year raises concerns about stability within the department 3 December 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in Gauteng notes that the Gauteng Premier, David Makhura has reshuffled his executives and the current MEC for Social Development, NomathembaMokgethi has been appointed as the new MEC for Health. This clearly means that there will be a new MEC for Social Development in Gauteng. This also means that this year alone there will have been a total of three MECs who have headed this department which is worrying considering that this department has been without a head for four months since the passing of the late MEC ThuliswaNkabinde-Khawe. MEC Panyaza Lesufi was appointed in an acting position to the Department of Social Development but with all the challenges in his Department of Education, he did not have adequate time nor the passion to serve two departments at the same time. The Department of Social Development is a critical department in delivering social and welfare services to communities within Gauteng and ensuring the wellbeing of its residents. With the global Covid-19 pandemic which has resulted in a national lockdown, this department plays a vital role in contributing to the alleviation of poverty through social relief programmes such as the food parcels. The Department of Social Development is known for corruption and underspending and requires strong decisive political oversight. This department is no longer functioning properly because the Premier keeps on changing the heads. There is a need for a dedicated custodian for this department. The DA calls on Premier Makhura to prioritise the social plight of Gauteng residents by stabilising the leadership of the department as it affects the strategy and the mandate of this department. The new MEC that will be appointed has big shoes to fill as this department is not stable, is in a mess and is failing to deliver on its core mandate. Issued by RefiloeNt’sekhe,DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Social Development, 3 December 2020 