 Elastoplast for the knocked-out economy Just as a heavy punch on the side of a boxer’s head can disrupt his brain’s neurovascular coupling processes causing him to fall like a log, the lockdown blow had disrupted the intricate flow of funds in the economy. BankServAfrica’s figures for Black Friday confirmed consumers are still on the canvas: turnover declined by a whopping 52% and there was a 30% decline in the number of in-store card transactions. The pockets of the majority of individuals and a substantial share of businesses now resemble those of the state-owned enterprises. People are hesitant to spend with unemployment dramatically higher than before lockdown, due to the government turning off the income tap for most enterprises for at least 3 months, declaring them non-essential (in the case of the hospitality sector almost 8 months). The government has thus achieved not only the lengthening of the jobless queues but also driving the rest of the population closer to poverty. It was a cruel knock-out blow by the government The religion of the developmental saviour The subconscious neurovascular coupling process ensures oxygen supply in nano-seconds through blood flow to the brain segments most active at that split second. A boxer can recover from a knock-out if there was no rupture of arteries and quick restoration of normal flow of blood in the brain. If not, there can be permanent brain damage, even death. Our thought processes depend on continuous uninterrupted subconscious processes. Likewise, an economy depends on the continuous uninterrupted flow of funds that is totally unregulated in the sense that no entity controls or directs the trillions of individual transactions by billions of consumers (both individuals and enterprises) buying their daily requirements and selling their products and services, either worldwide, or at a lower scale in different countries. The Bleak Friday data indicates the government’s lockdown punch caused chronically reduced demand. The SA government has no eye for the intricate spontaneous order that emerges in a market-oriented economy. Their collectivist belief in the saviour of the developmental state that knows best, blinkers their sight from the reality that the enterprise world is a spontaneous order that emerges from uncoordinated decisions to trade or not to trade. Their gospel emboldens them therefore to decide: The government cannot imagine a spontaneous order that has not been planned or devised by any government, national planning commission or national coordinating command council. In fact, they cannot tolerate the idea that something orderly can emanate from uncontrolled actions. A spontaneous order The emergence of an order with significant correlations arise from the mass of ongoing unrelated decisions to buy or not to buy, to rent or not to rent, to produce more or to produce less. EOSA refers to it as the enterprise architecture.  In this blog, the focus falls on some spatial implications of the enterprise architecture, namely enterprise space. This is not physical space like a shop, an industrial site or a mall. It is the space available in a city or town due to the demand for products or services of businesses that operate in that locality. The number of businesses in any city or town is determined predominantly by two factors: Whilst everyone would acknowledge that the first component, especially, is very obvious, few people realise that the moment one plots the total household income of a town or city on the horizontal axis and the number of formal enterprise manifestations in those towns and cities on the vertical axis, a correlation emerges that is so significant that one can base projections on it. Figure 1 (based on EOSA and StatsSA data for a total of 174 SA cities and towns) reveals a correlation close to 1, namely r = 0,97812.  The implications are stark: if the total household income would contract or rise annually, the number of enterprises would also decline or increase. If the lockdown impact in Bloemfontein would cause the total annual household income to contract by 10%, the number of enterprises is likely to subsequently decline by about 8% from 6755 to 6215. In the case of Paarl, a 15% decline in total household income would cause the number of enterprises to decline also by 13% from 2290 to 1990. The only factor that could mitigate a decline in the number of enterprises during a period of total household income contraction is the role of special entrepreneurs: those running businesses that attract a substantial portion of turnover by convincing clients outside the locality, of the quality of their products and services, effectively operating “export” enterprises. This is a reality largely ignored by the government in its mostly futile attempts to stimulate and promote formal enterprises, especially for “emerging” (read black) entrepreneurs. Shortly after 1994, the government withdrew from the Small Business Development Corporation, a public-private partnership that was funded by both sectors, to pursue its own approach in an unfettered mode through the Khula enterprise development agency, helping emerging entrepreneurs with loans and grants. The private sector continued its involvement through Business Partners. A track record of failure The government’s record in promoting business development and growth is dismal: We’ll resurrect the economy The lack of success is because the government operates from the premise that the enterprise world is an empty slate just waiting for them to godlike write upon it. Assuming unlimited unoccupied enterprise space, the government acts as a promotor of new business formation rather than ensuring a market-friendly and safe environment. It effectively views itself as an enterprise factory. The overwhelming majority of enterprises created through the government business factory were, however, of the “run-of-the-mill” kind, thus competing with existing businesses for local household expenditure. By ignoring the spontaneous order regarding entrepreneurial space, the outcome of these exercises boiled in many instances down to: The very same mind-set that underpins the government’s deficient enterprise strategies also informs their decisions on lockdown. They believe the government, not customers, should decide what would qualify as essential services and goods to produce and trade. In addition, they believe that they can resurrect the economy when they decide to lift restrictions and that governmental grants and loan schemes would suffice to get businesses up and running again. The TERS payments and umpteenth grant and guaranteed loan schemes for businesses to soften and reverse the damage government has done cannot achieve the same flow of funds that not stopping the economy would have ensured. Support mechanisms in the form of UIF grants and a range of funding lines for businesses were aimed at mitigating the outcomes of the lockdown abomination, conveying the fact that there is still no recognising that deep systemic damage was caused to the economy by disrupting the neurovascular coupling process that resulted in stopping the flow of business oxygen to businesses. It is the equivalent of placing Elastoplast on a slight cut on the knocked-out boxer’s cheek whilst he lies unconscious from the murderous punch. The Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan (ERRP) falls far short of addressing the destruction of jobs and enterprises. The implementation mechanisms are the proverbial camel outcome when the committee wanted to design a racehorse. And ominous regulatory control mechanisms are also lurking in the process with “buying local” effectively BEE parading with a Covid-facemask. EOSA’s proposals EOSA proposes the following steps to restore “oxygen” to the damaged parts of the “enterprise brain”: This will amount to an across the board systemic intervention that will resuscitate and stimulate the flow of funds in the world of enterprise with benefits to end consumers as well. EOSA will in the next blog indicate that this massive stimulus of economic freedom can be achieved without major implications for tax revenue.  And it would free SME owners from an administrative burden so that they could concentrate on attempts to revitalise their businesses. Johannes Wessels is CEO of the Enterprise Observatory & a member of the Advisory Panel of @EndLockdownSA @johannesEOSA1 This article first appeared on the EOSA website. 