Statement about the repeated postponements of the trial against president Zuma by the NPA 8 December 2020 The JG Zuma Foundation again expresses its dismay at yet another indication that the State is not ready to proceed with its long awaited arms deal case against President Zuma. President Zuma has stated numerous times that he is ready to face this politically motivated arms deal case. This has also been repeatedly stated on his behalf at the High Court in Pietermaritzburg. It is extremely prejudicial to President Zuma for the prosecution to again fail to proceed with their prosecution where they have repeatedly claimed that they have a case against President Zuma and are ready to proceed with it. This conduct of the NPA now falls perfectly within what Section 342A of the Criminal Procedure Act that defines as unreasonable delays. There is no escaping the conclusion that these repeated delays perpetuated by the NPA are tantamount to justice delayed is justice denied. Former National Director of Public Prosecutions BulelaniNgcuka, in a recent interview with Newsroom Africa stated what we have always said, that there was no direct evidence linking President Zuma to the arms deal bribes. There was no evidence then, there is no evidence now. We call upon our society regardless of their position on President Zuma to demand more fairness and justice in our courts. The need to respect the Bill of Rights is sacrosanct and we should be concerned when state institutions are using our courts and taxes to fight endless political battles. The NPA's "hide and seek" tactics must be exposed and the real beneficiaries of bribes in the arms deal must be exposed. The NPA has repeatedly lied to the courts and the public about its readiness to proceed with the trial. In December 2019 the NPA stated in court that it was ready to proceed with its case and now in December 2020 after requesting another three postponements they are still not ready to proceed with their case making a series of new excuses again. If what we say is untrue, we challenge the NPA to start the trial at the next date. We can confidently assure the citizens of this country that even on the date now set down for February 2021, the trial will not start because the NPA will have new excuses. Overall, this case calls upons us as citizens of this country to earnestly reflect on whether our judiciary is still the true and reliable defender of its' citizens and the protection of constitutionally enshrined rights or whether it has been now reduced to a participant in our country's political battles. Kaziiyozalainkomoni? Issued by the JG Zuma Foundation, 8 December 2020