Government’s Covid-19 strategy full of short-term measures without a vaccine plan 2 December 2020 Note to Editors: Please find attached a soundbite by SiviweGwarube MP. The Democratic Alliance (DA) has taken note of the reports following the meeting of the National Coronavirus Command Council (NCCC) this week and the various recommendations that are set to be approved by Cabinet next week. While there is grave concern about the rise in new infections, cluster outbreaks and the inadequacy of the health system in many provinces to deal with this resurgence, some of these measure would be a blunt tool that would hurt the South African economy and cost us lives and livelihoods. The identification of hotspot areas is welcomed and a localised plan to deal with cluster outbreaks in those areas while bolstering the health response is necessary. Shutting down entire areas is not feasible and banning the sale of liquor and shutting down businesses which thrive at this time of the year will plunge us further into an economic crisis. What seems to be missing entirely from the South African government’s plan is a vaccine rollout strategy. It has been reported that the United Kingdom has approved the emergency procurement of the Covid-19 vaccine. Pfizer and BioNTech have started mass producing vaccines much of which will be sold and distributed in the UK and the US. While it is feasible that South Africa may not be the one of the first countries to receive this vaccine, it is critical that our strategy of dealing with this pandemic is also focused on the longer term – the rollout strategy of a vaccine according to prioritised individuals. President Cyril Ramaphosa and his team should announce - in great detail - where we are with the procurement of the Covid-19 vaccine and Minister Zweli Mkhize should flesh out exactly how the distribution of this vaccine will work. We understand that the transportation and storage of the vaccine is a complicated process. We also understand that South Africa has a unique set of challenges with our healthcare system that is broken and dysfunctional in many parts. That is why this vaccine plan must be central to the strategy of dealing with this pandemic. We have seen the devastating effects of a prolonged lockdown has had on the people of South Africa, our economy and our health system. Resurgence was always a risk as the country went on about its business. That is why we need to have a solid plan to deal with this pandemic permanently and swiftly. We cannot run away from it forever while millions starve in their homes. The President and the Health Minister must brief the country on the vaccine process and progress without any further delay. Issued by SiviweGwarube,DA Shadow Minister of Health, 2 December 2020