STATEMENT OF THE ANC ON 2021 JANUARY 8TH CELEBRATIONS Following the decision by the ANC National Executive Committee that the 109 Anniversary of the ANC will be held in the Limpopo Province, a program has been developed to ensure that the occasion continues to serve its historical role of setting a scene for the year ahead. Our revolutionary movement, the African National Congress (ANC), celebrates 109 years of its existence on Friday, the 8th of January. We convey our congratulatory messages and gratitude to the founding fathers, members, supporters, voters and volunteers of our glorious movement for contributing to the sustenance and remarkable growth and development of this revolutionary giant over many decades. The ANC has remained intact for over a century and continues to be the only hope and true embodiment of the aspirations of millions of our people. The ANC issued its first January 8 statement in 1972. This statement outlined the movement's annual programme. The ANC issued its next January 8 statement in 1979. The practice of marking the ANC anniversary with a statement became a tradition to this day. January 8, 1912 stands out as a historic and watershed moment in the history of the liberation struggle of our country, region and our continent. As we celebrate the 109 birthday of Africa's oldest liberation movement, we do so mindful of the monumental challenges that still need to be overcome on our road towards a truly non-racial, non-sexist, democratic and prosperous society. eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_3',113,'0','0']));eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_4',113,'0','1']));However due to the outbreak of Coronavirus, we have decided to take a different form and shape in commemorating this special occasion. We will not be having a mass rally as it was previously the case. This is due to our commitment towards preserving lives in the midst of this deadly virus as well as appreciation of efforts that have been taken by our government in a bid to minimize the effects of this global pandemic. We are encouraged and inspired by the resilience of many South Africans as we navigate our way through Covid-19. The 109th anniversary celebration will be taking at Seleteng village in Ga-Mphahlele, just under 60 kilometers outside Polokwane. This is where the late ANC President General Comrade Sefako Mapogo Makgatho was born. We chose to host the event in this area as part of reconnecting with the masses of our people and embracing our Struggle Heritage. The event will take place under strict protocols, in line with Covid-19 regulations. This includes wearing of masks at all times and application of hands sanitizer. We are limiting the attendance to hundred people in the main plenary and will connect to all provinces via video link to ensure that regulations are not undermined in any way. This will also make it easier to contain the huge media influx that we experience during this period. We call on all our members and supporters to respect and comply with the protocols without any fail. Limpopo will host the major celebration event as decided by the last NEC meeting. The President of the ANC will deliver the NEC's January 8 message as is the case every year. The main celebration will be preceeded by a number of build up activities which include visits to royal houses in the province, meeting with the religious leaders, sector formations, a Presidential golf day as well as engagements with various sectors of the community. A number of activities will unfold from the 5th-7th January 2020. Only ANC national officials led by Our President Cyril Ramaphosa will be deployed in Limpopo for the main event and all other related activities. ANC NEC members together with our alliance partners will also be deployed across all the 8 provinces where similar activities will also be hosted. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_1',115,'0','0']));Members of the media wishing to attend the event are urged to fill-in an online application form which is available on our website(www.anc1912.org.za) January 8 presents the ANC and the nation with an opportunity to, once again, take stock of the progress we have registered and to reflect on the road that still lies ahead. It is a moment to rededicate ourselves to the unity and renewal of our movement and to intensity our pursuit of radical socio-economic transformation. Accordingly, the call to action for all cadres of our movement to respond with practical action to the marching orders as shall have been reflected in the January 8 statement. The ANC is satisfied with its state of readiness for the event. The excitement among the people of this province is palpable. We are confident that the ANC's 109 anniversary celebrations will be a resounding success. Issued by the ANC, 18 December 2020 