Film shoots get green light as SAPS commit to respecting permits issued Following unlawful interference by the National Minister of Police, Bheki Cele in a permitted and legal film shoot taking place in Cape Town this week, the City of Cape Town approached the Western Cape High Court to grant an interdict preventing the South African Police Service (SAPS) from any further unlawful interference in legitimate and permitted film shoots. Read more below: eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_0',112,'0','0']));Before the matter could be heard the State Attorney representing the National Minister of Police approached our legal team with the following settlement proposal: 1. The Minister of Police confirms that the City of Cape Town is not precluded from issuing permits in terms of the Filming By-Law promulgated on 24 June 2005, subject to section 2(1) of the By-Law. 2. The Minister of Police confirms that M and M Images CC trading as Red Petal Productions, and any other film production company issued with a valid permit by the City of Cape Town, can continue with their film shoot activities in terms of the permit issued to them by the City of Cape Town, without fear of unlawful interference by any member of the South African Police. 3. The City withdraws its application and each parties pay its own cost. Dan Plato, Executive Mayor of Cape Town, said, ‘I welcome the outcome of this matter and am grateful that justice is being upheld. I have written to President Ramaphosa requesting his response on the unlawful conduct of Minister Cele. The matter has also been referred to Parliament’s Ethics Committee as Minister Cele’s behaviour was highly problematic and must be addressed. Cape Town is a film friendly city and we have made our city an enabling environment for local and international film crews who love to visit our shores. Cape Town has some of the best creative talent in the world, which is why we continue to be a destination of choice for international and local production companies. I am pleased that this outcome will give peace of mind to the many film crews who work in our beautiful city.’ Alderman JP Smith, Mayoral Committee Member for Safety and Security said, ‘The City of Cape Town would also like to reiterate that all film sets and other production workspaces within the metro are bound by strict COVID-19 protocols as contained in the Film Permit Office’s Standard Operating Procedures. The film shoot on Sunday had clearly put measures in place that observed strict Covid-19 protocols. I am grateful that we were able to resolve this matter so quickly and ensure that the film industry can get back to business without delay. The City currently has seven other film productions permitted to shoot on our beaches and this development also protects them from any interference from SAPS. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));It is now vital to ensure that this industry, which has suffered immense loses due to the pandemic and subsequent lockdown, be allowed to work towards recovery during its busiest time of the year without any impediments.’ In order for a permit to be granted, production companies have to ensure that: - A COVID-19 Compliance Officer is employed to enforce health and safety protocols - Number of people on set should not exceed 75 people as directed by the Arts and Culture Minister - Regular disinfection of production sets/workspaces before and after filming - All crew and cast are provided 2 compliant masks or face shields to be worn at all times on set. More on these protocols at www.filmcapetown.com Issued by the City of Cape Town, 17 December 2020 Previous:eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-banner-1','ezslot_1',116,'0','0'])); STATEMENT BY THE EXECUTIVE MAYOR, ALDERMAN DAN PLATO National Police Minister’s bully tactics could cost Cape film economy R24 million as productions cancel shoots Yesterday’s bully tactics by National Police Minister, Bheki Cele, to close down a legitimate and permitted film shoot on Camps Bay Beach has resulted in the immediate cancellation of 11 additional film shoots for fear of further financial losses if shut down irregularly and without due cause by the South African Police Service (SAPS). eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-large-leaderboard-2','ezslot_4',117,'0','0']));Bheki Cele is not the National Commissioner anymore - he was fired from that position in 2012 and is now a minister, who has no authority to instruct a police officer. We have already approached the High Court to grant an interdict preventing the SAPS from further unlawful interference in legitimate film shoots. This matter will be heard tomorrow. The City of Cape Town and Western Cape Government have repeatedly said that while battling the spread of the coronavirus, it is critical that we also open up our economy to retain as many jobs as possible. This sentiment has also been echoed by President Cyril Ramaphosa. I will be writing to the President to ask if he supports his National Minister’s destructive and unlawful behaviour, and if not, what action he plans to take to address his Minister’s bully tactics. Minister Cele’s unlawful conduct includes the issuing of instructions to operational SAPS staff, which he has no authority to do. This matter has also been reported to the Parliamentary Ethics Committee. Eleven productions have notified the City of Cape Town that they will be cancelling their shoots, each of which is estimated to cost a minimum of R1,2 million. These costs do not include hotels, flights and other costs for hundreds of film crew and support staff, all of whom are adhering to the strictest COVID-19 safety protocols, as the industry slowly finds its feet again after months of lockdown. Cape Town is a film-friendly city and we will not allow National Government’s unlawful behaviour to change this. We have made our city an enabling environment for local and international film crews who love to visit our shores. Cape Town has some of the best creative talent in the world, which is why we continue to be a destination of choice for international and local production companies. I applaud Alderman JP Smith, Mayoral Committee Member for Safety and Security, for standing up to Minister Cele yesterday and correcting his poor understanding of the national COVID-19 regulations. Instead of policing beaches with heavily armed police officers and intimidating innocent sun bathers, the National Police Minister should be in our most crime affected communities, making sure that gangsters are caught and put behind bars, making our communities safer. Issued by the City of Cape Town, 17 December 2020 