Get rid of the superfluous top managers on SABC-ship 1 December 2020 There are very few differences between the sinking SABC-ship and the other state institutions that are also floating around aimlessly due to the mismanagement by the leadership on board and the government. The reasons are obvious. In a media report (Bussiness Live, November last year), the Minister of Communication, Stella Ndabeni-Abrahams, stated that the executive manager and board members of the broadcaster "deserve" the R42,5 million that they were paid at the time as that is what they are "worth". The custom of paying such exorbitant salaries is not something new, it did not start last year.  In 2015/16, the then chief operating manager of the SABC, HlaudiMotsoeneng, earned a salary of R4,197 million while the broadcaster had a deficit of R411 million for that financial year. At the time, the president of the country earned only R2,75 million. Motsoeneng was effectively earning nearly twice as much as the president at that stage. The current President, Cyril Ramaphosa's, salary amounts to R3,1 million, which is still significantly less than what Motsoeneng and his senior colleagues were earning five years ago. The salaries of the SABC's top management, consisting of eight people, amount to R31, 278 million – an average of R3,9 million per year. The Minister must explain to South Africa's taxpayers how it is possible for a chief operational manager to be worth almost twice as much as the country's president. The FF Plus has long since pointed out that exorbitant salaries are a problem not only at the SABC, but also at all state institutions. This is a shining example of the gravy train. It has now reached a point where the price for the extravagance must be paid and suddenly those keeping the engine of the ship going – news readers, writers and technicians – are the ones who are being retrenched. Rather get rid of the top management and executive authority and reduce the inflated salaries. That is the only way to save the SABC-ship from going under. Issued by Pieter Groenewald, FF Plus leader, 1 December 2020