EFF STATEMENT ON THE COVID 19 CONTRIBUTIONS. Tuesday, 01 December 2020 The EFF notes that from all organisations, institutions, and companies which have made payroll contributions to the Solidarity Fund, we as the EFF have been front-runners. The Solidarity Fund was established for the purposes of fighting against COVID-19. Today, during their presentation in Parliament, the Board of the Solidarity Fund illustrated the EFFs contribution of R15 million as almost double the payroll contribution by the second biggest contributor which is Government. This illustrates that the Economic Freedom Fighters is indisputably the only Organisation that is truly committed to the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic. All other political formations in South Africa are not committed to the fight against COVID-19 and are just making rhetorical commitments. Instead of demonstrating genuine solidarity with those infected and affected by COVID-19, the ruling party has used its deployees to loot money that was meant for the fight against the pandemic. As one of the biggest donors to the Solidarity Fund and as true representatives of the people of South Africa, we demand that the Solidarity Fund must publicly and honestly respond to the following questions which they did not satisfactorily answer during Parliamentary appearance: 1) The procurement policies adopted by the Solidarity Fund and whether there were competitive bids for those who were awarded contracts to supply goods and services for purposes of the Fund. 2) The list and demographic breakdown of all companies and people who benefitted from the procurement by the Solidarity Fund. 3) The list of NGOs, Civil Society Organisations, Faith Based Organisations and all other formations that the Solidarity Fund partnered with to deliver on its mission and commitments. 4) Detailed breakdown of procurement that benefitted local industrial and manufacturing companies. 5) Publishing of government Ministers names and private companies that have made pledges to the Solidarity Fund but did not fulfil their commitments. We demand that all these must be honestly responded to because a Solidarity Fund which depends on money from members of the public must be publicly held accountable. The EFF will continuously and closely monitor all activities of the Solidarity Fund and will expose all shenanigans and influenced procurement practices whenever they raise their ugly head. We have on several occasions written to the Solidarity Fund and will continually demand honest responses. Statement issued by the EFF, 1 December 2020