MEC Mazibuko fails the victims and survivors of gender-based violence in Gauteng 2 December 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in Gauteng is disappointed to learn that the Gauteng Department of Community Safety has consistently failed to roll out the Green Doors meant to ensure that the victims and survivors of gender-based violence receive prompt and effective services and toprevent secondary victimisation of the survivors. This information was revealed in the department’s second quarter report for the 2020/21 financial year. A Green Door is a safe space in the community that is at least 5kms away from a police station and is run by community members. It offers debriefing, containment and referral to necessary stakeholders such as local NGOs, SAPS, and courts. Green Door is a link between the community and SAPS, and the victim can stay for up to 6 hours at the site. According to the second quarter report, the department had a target of rolling out nine Green Doors. This target was not achieved, and the department has not given a reason for the deviation. The department states that the ambassadors have been recruited and screened and that the procurement process is underway to ensure that the rollout happens before the end of the financial year. This target was also not achieved in the first quarter of the 2020/21 financial year. The reasons given by the department for non-achievement is that due to lockdown, no Green Doors were erected because of the inaccessibility of the homes. It is worrying that the department consistently fails to establish Green Doors despite the increase of gender-based violence cases across the country during the lockdown. The DA calls on the Gauteng MEC for Community Safety, Faith Mazibuko to ensure that these Green Doors are prioritised to provide adequate and effective service and support to the victims and survivors of gender-based violence. We will hold MEC Mazibuko accountable for the increase in cases of gender- based violence if these Green Doors are not erected as a matter of urgency. Issued by Michael Shackleton,DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Community Safety, 2 December 2020