MEC Albert Fritz questions suspected murderer's parole 25 February 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0']));The Western Cape Government shares the anger with residents of this province that the alleged murder of Tazne van Wyk was committed by a suspect who had been released on parole, with many prior convictions on record. MEC Albert Fritz said, “It is the job of our justice system to keep criminals behind bars. If it is true that this suspect, who had previously been convicted and released 11 times, was able to get parole and commit this violent crime, then our criminal justice system has failed our residents. Further investigation is needed into the systemic issues faced our parole system.” The murder suspect, Moehydien Pangaker, had been convicted and released 11 times and he was still able to get parole. His charges included possession of a stolen vehicle, assault, murder, theft and house breaking. In 2008, he was sentenced for kidnapping, child abuse and culpable homicide and received a 10-year sentence. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0']));Minister Fritz said, “As the Western Cape Government, we are taking a whole of society approach. The Minister of Health, Nomafrench Mbombo, is accompanying Tazne’s family to Worcester Forensic Pathology Laboratory to offer support this morning.  The Minister of Social Development, Sharna Fernandez, has also ensured that social workers were deployed to assist the family with this trauma.” “Pangaker was released on parole in 2015, having served only seven years and previously broken correctional supervision. He was placed on parole supervision between October 2016 and May 2019. He then again absconded supervision and a case was opened. Clarity is needed on why Pangaker was not arrested after he absconded. I will ask the Western Cape Police Ombudsman, Mr JJ Brand, to urgently investigate this,” said Minister Fritz. MEC Fritz continued, “I have activated the Court Watching Brief Unit to monitor the case and ensure that it is not struck off the court roll due to SAPS inefficiencies. After returning to Cape Town from Cradock, Eastern Cape, the suspect appeared in Goodwood Magistrates Court. The Court Watching Brief Unit confirmed that the case had been postponed until 17 April, pending SAPS investigation. Further, that the suspect would not be applying for bail and will remain in jail before appearing again in court.” Issued by Ann Tomás Murray, Spokesperson for Minister Albert Fritz, 25 February 2020eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));