MEC David Maynier launches start-up online investment course to boost Western Cape digital economy growth 3 February 2020 The vibrant start-up scene in the Western Cape offers exciting opportunities for those who understand the risks and rewards of early-stage investing. To encourage more South Africans to consider investing in early-stage start-ups, the Department of Economic Development and Tourism (DEDAT) is launching an early-stage start-up investment online course in February 2020. The DEDAT ‘Introduction to Early-stage Investing’ course is an online programme comprised of seven video modules giving viewers insights into the early-stage investment landscape, along with the investment options available to them. The modules are complemented by interviews with 20 industry experts from across the start-up and investment ecosystem, including venture capital firms, impact investing funds and start-up accelerators. Course participants will explore topics such as sourcing, assessing and making an investment; and learn about regulatory issues affecting investors in South Africa. The course covers the basics of early-stage investing from individual angel deals to Section 12J funds. It’s a primer for those interested in playing a part in the innovative start-up space; adventurous investors looking to make high-risk, high-reward investments; and experienced entrepreneurs who would like to share their expertise. It is also vital viewing for start-ups and business owners to help them understand how various early-stage investment vehicles work and what they can expect from investors. The content will be available free of charge on DEDAT’s official e-learning platform. Early-stage funding is consistently raised as an issue that is stifling start-up growth. This programme aims to support the sector by assisting interested investors with tools and advice while helping them to discover tech-sector investment opportunities. Last Thursday, I signed a pledge of support for the early stage investment community together with DEDAT Deputy Director-General Jo-Ann Johnston. This course forms part of our larger programme to support the growth of the Western Cape tech sector and position the province as a leading digital hub. Encouraging early-stage funders will help grow the number of start-ups in the province who will in turn contribute to growing the economy and creating jobs, especially for young people, in the Western Cape. I encourage any potential start-up investors to take part in the course, make the most of this opportunity and consider investing in the vibrant digital economy that is in the Western Cape. The first 35 people to register for the DEDAT Introduction to Early-stage Investing will be invited to attend an exclusive event during the SAVCA Venture Capital Conference 2020 at Hazendal Wine Estate, Stellenbosch where they can meet early-stage investment experts who appeared in the videos as well as build networks within the ecosystem. For more information, go to www.westerncape.gov.za/site-page/early-stage-investing-course. Issued by Francine Higham, Spokesperson for the Provincial Minister of Finance and Economic Opportunities, 3 February 2020