Tembisa Hospital’s labour, neonatal and pediatric wards to get additional staff 24 February 2020 To supplement and strengthen clinical staff at the Tembisa Hospital’s labour ward, neonatal unit and paediatric wards, over 80 critical post lists has been submitted to the Gauteng Department of Health’s head office for approval and funding. These posts include doctors, nurses, cleaners and porters. This process started on February 12 and it is being handled with urgency and utmost importance. These posts are spread across disciplines including doctors, nurses and support staff. One of the specialist posts on the priority list is for a cardiologist aimed at minimizing long waiting times for referral. With regards to overcrowding at labour ward, a process is underway to establish an on-site midwife birthing unit. Tembisa Hospital experienced an outbreak of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (CRE) late last year, which led to deaths of infants. These infections particularly affect the low-birthweight neonates. The CRE bacteria have, in recent years, proven to be a national and international challenge across the health system due to organism resistance to antibiotics. “We are working around the clock to make all the necessary interventions at Tembisa Hospital to address some of the issues we found needed urgent attention. The hospital has quite large catchment area, therefore staff compliment needs a relook, hence we have identified these posts,” said Gauteng MEC for Health, Dr Bandile Masuku. One of the issues that have been noted at the labour ward was that some expectant mothers do not enrol for antenatal classes which makes it difficult for doctors and nurses to notice issues early on. “We plead with members of the community to enrol for antenatal classes as soon as they confirm pregnancy, this not only helps medical staff make informed decision, but also makes the delivery process relatively smooth,” added Dr Masuku. Issued by Kwara Kekana, Spokesperson: MEC for Health, 24 February 2020