ANC calls on all members of Parliament to refrain from using gender-based violence for political point-scoring 19 February 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[468,60],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_3',112,'0','0']));The African National Congress (ANC) has noted with grave disappointment the unfortunate use of Gender-Based Violence (GBV)for political point-scoring during Post-SONA yesterday. The expedient use of the emotive subject of Gender-Based Violence had all the features of patriarchy and deep-seated prejudice against Women. The trivialization of Gender-Based Violence at the apex house of law making undermines the very honour bestowed on the National Assembly. If left unattended the kind of scenes witnessed in parliament can only serve to push back efforts by the ANC led Government to mainstream the fight against GBV. The Women of our country and the world over mostly bare the harsh reality of abuse and look up to legislatures for protection through the affirmation of laws that protects, preserves and upholds their rights. The ANC henceforth expects all its public representatives to refrain from scenes that fuel perception of using gender based violence for publicity and attention seeking stunts. The ANC also believes that public representatives regardless of their political affiliation have a moral duty to act in a responsible manner primarily around their articulations on an emotive subject like Gender Based Violence (GBV) The ANC further calls on relevant committees in parliament to enforce the use of appropriate language and acceptable conduct from amongst all members of parliament. The ANC caucus should also consider conducting an investigation to establish whether the unfortunate utterances specifically on GBV do not constitute transgression and where necessary submit to relevant committees for appropriate action. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));All South Africans, irrespective of their political persuasions and station in life, must unite against the scourge of Gender Based Violence. The ANC stands for a non-racial; non-sexist and prosperous South Africa and expect all its members to be true champions of these values. Issued by Pule Mabe, National Spokesperson, ANC, 19 February 2020