For the first time, I will boycott watching SONA this year 10 February 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_2',112,'0','0']));On Thursday, South Africa will face the ordeal of another State of the Nation Address (SONA). Year after year, we are confronted by this display of political disconnection from the lived experiences of the people of our country. Presidents, one year after the next, stand before us and describe a country that leave most of us wondering which country they live in. Members of Parliament (MPs) swan around in their matric dance outfits, walking down red carpets like Hollywood stars. Debates follow which appear to be more about witty come-backs, political point scoring and affirmation from equally out of touch MPs. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));What will we hear this year about fighting corruption when not one single high-profile prosecution has taken place? What tough talk will we hear about our ailing state-owned entities while we continue to sink billions into these failings businesses? How many jobs will we be told will be created in the year ahead? Watching this bizarre ritual, I find myself asking the question: How does any of this benefit the people of our country? I am still searching for an answer. The State of the Nation Address is a symptom of our broken political system in that it serves itself – the politicians and parties within it. The majority of our voting-age population have given up on our political system, and watching SONA will show you why. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));That is why I will be boycotting SONA this year. Watch my video here. Since I launched The People’s Dialogue in December last year, we have reached millions of people and have been engaged by more than a million South Africans with their ideas, thoughts and solutions to fix our country. This has affirmed something I held as a belief before launching The People’s Dialogue, that South Africans are good people, want to believe in a better future but are being let down by their failing political system. Just to give you some examples: Patrick felt strongly that “We have become a society that creates, rewards and protects thieves. Parasitic thieves. Ambitious thieves. Greedy thieves, with an insatiable lust for money, and an aversion to honest work and creativity.” Dean’s view is that “the problem is the system of career politicians is inherently broken. It is human nature to look after your own survival and your own future. Career politicians are no exception, they will say nice things that they think the people want to hear but it is generally just to ensure their own survival.” Meanwhile, Kagiso believes that “the poor leadership practice we’ve seen has not only been detrimental to the image of the country but has left thousands if not more devastated in our nation.” Ramesh agreed, putting forward that we should “recruit people that want to serve the country, put the people before themselves. These people must be morally ethical. The individuals must have the necessary skills in the required fields to realise the vision of the organization.” This is the REAL state of the nation, delivered by the people of South Africa. Instead of watching SONA, I will be reading through and listening to the inputs of the good people of our country. These are the views that matter the most. eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-banner-1','ezslot_4',116,'0','0']));I believe solutions to our greatest challenges will not come from the fancy-dress show taking place in Cape Town on Thursday, but from the residents of our great country. Issued byMichael Beaumont on behalf of Founder of People’s Dialogue, 10 February 2020