NEHAWU KwaZulu-Natal calls for forensic investigation at the Elangeni TVET College 25 February 2020 The National Education, Health and Allied Workers’ Union [NEHAWU] in KwaZulu-Natal calls for a forensic investigation into the Elangeni TVET College over allegations of corruption. It has recently emerged that R1.8 million that was meant to assist students living with disabilities disappeared at the college. Just yesterday, when our members and workers reported for duty they found that there was a burglary at the college and that only the finance office was broken into. Computers and files were stolen from the office thus erasing information related to the missing funds. NEHAWU has been at the forefront of highlighting issues related to corruption, maladministration and irregular appointments taking place at the college to the Department of Higher Education and Training. Our shop stewards and members are victimised and intimidated for highlighting the sad state of the college including the use of bogus suspensions to silence them. We are aware that since the funds went missing the principal of the college has not reported for duty and she has not made any means to get to the bottom of this matter. Students with disabilities cannot be denied access to further their education or gain necessary skills to penetrate the job market because the college management decided to lose money meant to help them. In this regard, we call for an immediate forensic investigation into the disappearance of the money and those found to be responsible must face the full wrath of the law. The investigation must also include a probe into irregular appointments and maladministration at the college. Should the college management continue to drag its feet in relation to fixing this matter we will be left with no option but to begin a process to engage students and other progressive organisations in preparation for a series of lunch time pickets. Issued by Ayanda Blessing Zulu, NEHAWU KZN Provincial Secretary, 25 February 2020