ANC NYTT reacts to the warrant of arrest issued against former president Jacob Zuma 5 February 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_3',112,'0','0']));The ANC NYTT has noted with disgust the warrant of arrest issued against former president Cde Jacob Zuma. Reports state that judge Dhaya Pillay rejected the sick note for Military 1 Hospital, stating that she issues the warrant of arrest against President Zuma. This warrant of arrest is nothing but the continuous vilification that former president continues to be subjected to in this country. For more than a decade, the state has failed to prove beyond reasonable doubts that the former president is guilty of any crime. Refusal of the sick note for Cde Zuma is proof enough that there is a mission to destroy what is left of him and his dignity. eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','1']));F.W De Clerk continues to roam around the streets of South Africa, paraded like some Hero who took us to the promised land. De Clerk led the crime against humanity, had thousands of our people and revolutionaries killed in the hands of his government. He Brutalized our people and left them with no dignity. To this day, there are families who do not know where their loved ones are, they were taken away and killed far from their homes, buried like dogs by the same De Clerk and his government. Red carpets and courteous treatment are afforded to De Clerk. Today we see former president Zuma, hunted down like a serial killer which he is not, his sickness has been turned into a joke. We need to agree that not all is well in South Africa. And there seem to be a mission to defocus our people from real issues. The country's economy is in shambles. The State-Owned Entities are as good as dead. We have seen a long list of South African judges from the highest to the lowest courts of this country, accused of being in the pockets of the white monopoly capital. No investigation was carried out as it relates to these accusations. Yet we are made to believe that issuing this warrant of arrest was a genuine act of law. The people who should be focusing on reviving our economy and fixing what is wrong in our country are focused on tactics to vilify and victimize Zuma. When our courts that are meant to protect us and all human rights are the ones that vilify people, even at their weakest state of health, it's rather sickening. This country cannot be turned into a friends like these sort of an arrangement and we keep quiet about it. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_4',114,'0','0']));For all the crimes that the white establishment has committed against humanity, it had to find an escape goat and Zuma became an easy target. Former President Zuma is only human like everyone of us. In your sober mind, you cannot think that a person who has suffered so much in his political life, at the age of Zuma cannot get sick. You cannot dismiss his sickness as some sort of a delaying tactic or refusal to attend the court case. The imbeciles and lumpens behind the scenes masquerading as voice of reason and fighters of corruption are not far from being exposed. Our movement is bleeding because people are so much entrenched into personal vendettas, that they will rather leave our people in darkness of nonsensical and unexplainable load shedding while they focus on destroying what is left of Zuma's dignity. The South African Judiciary has since turned itself into a public opinion arena. Its conduct is highly questionable. The freedom and the independence of the judiciary was not gained over a dish of sushi and a glass of wine. People died for this freedom. Our freedom was not free. eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_6',115,'0','0']));The warrant of arrest simply stand as a test to the people and we warn the judiciary and it's friends. Do not threaten the peace of our country. Do not threaten the patience of our people. If you start fire, you are bound to see flames. We call on the country, the members of the ANC and true leadership to defend the hard gains of democracy. Today it's Zuma tomorrow it may be another comrade. The truth is that even those who believe that they are the sweethearts of the white establishment today, they must know that they are only needed to deal with their fellow comrades today and when all our comrades are dealt with, the same white establishment will come for you. No one is safe. Not even the millionaire club of friends. Not even the poorest of the poor. Issued by ANC NYTT, 5 February 2020