Second farm attack in one week in small area in Free State 26 February 2020 The latest farm attack on a Free State farmer, Mr Japie van den Berg, on his farm Hillbrow in Vierfontein, highlights the need for more effective rural safety measures. This was the second serious farm attack that took place this week in a relatively small area of the Free State. A family member of Mr Van den Berg was also recently violently attacked on his farm near Wesselsbron by a perpetrator who had been out on bail. He has since died in a car accident. Just the other day, President Cyril Ramaphosa promised to review the criminal justice system with the aim of adjusting the parole system so as to ensure that convicted criminals do not commit acts of gender violence again after being released. There is obviously enough political will to combat gender violence, but the numerous pleas for increased rural safety fall on deaf ears. It is unacceptable that the Free State Premier, Sisi Ntombela, made no mention of rural safety in her State of the Province Address (SOPA). The FF Plus feels that the solution is obvious. The moment when there is political will to ensure rural safety and implement proper punitive measures, we will see a drastic decrease in farm attacks and murders. The FF Plus condemns all murder and violence in South Africa, but in particular acts of violence against the agricultural community due to the high unemployment rate among the rural community. Rural communities are vulnerable and often very remote so in some cases, people have to wait for hours for help to arrive from more urban areas. The FF Plus is serious about farm attacks and will continue to put pressure on the government to declare farm murders and attacks priority crimes. The FF Plus expresses its deepest condolences to the victim and his friends and family and wishes him a speedy recovery. The party will do what it can to make sure that the perpetrators are found and prosecuted so that justice is served. Issued by Jan van Niekerk, FF Plus provincial leader: Free State, 26 February 2020