EFF statement on the proceedings of the North West State of the Province Address 22 February 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_0',112,'0','0']));On Friday of the 21st of February 2020, the EFF North West participated in the State of the Province Address (SOPA). The caucus discussed among other things the relevance of the Premier addressing SOPA while most Departments in the province, including the office of the Premier, are under section 100(1 ) (b) of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. According to section a province cannot or does not fulfil an executive obligation in terms Of the Constitution or legislation, the national executive may intervene by taking any appropriate steps to ensure fulfilment of that obligation." The EFF discussed the section in question, and made a request for the Premier Prof. Job Mokgoro and the speaker of Provincial Legislature Mrs Suzan Dantjie to clarify the legitimacy of the administration since it was invoked in the 5th Parliament, from the 24th of May 2018 to date. Furthermore, the EFF demanded accountability on the reasons for the 6th Parliament to inherit the placement of section 100(1) on an administration from the 5th Parliament. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));The speaker refused to afford the EFF the opportunity to table points of orders and further hold the Premier accountable. She went to the extent of instructing security to forcefully remove members of the EFF, including those who were identified to be EFF members in the gallery. EFF members were assaulted and subsequently hospitalised. The EFF has opened 3 cases of assault at the Mmabatho Police Station. We therefore call for an inquiry on the proceedings of the North West SOPA by Parliament and the Minister of Cooperative Govemance and Traditional Affairs. It cannot be that opposition is victimised and assaulted in a democratic society when calling for accountability. Issued by Vuyani Pambo, National Spokesperson, 22 February 2020