DA committed to clean governance and compliance with National Treasury 20 February 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) has noted the latest attempt by the African National Congress (ANC) Chairperson in Tshwane, Cllr Kgosi Maepa, to mislead and lie to the residents of the City of Tshwane. This pertains to the matter where National Treasury indicated to the City that they intend stopping amounts of R146.4 million and R342.2 from the original 2019/20 Public Transport Grant allocation of R741.8 million and R1.7 billion Urban Settlement Development Grant, respectively, due to underspending by the City of Tshwane administration. It is clear that Cllr Maepa is a legislative and financial delinquent and the DA hereby places the facts of this matter on the table. This is a City administration matter and it is a normal and standard annual process where National Treasury highlights the under performance of grant spending to all municipalities. This is done in terms of section 19 of the 2019 Division of Revenue Act and Section 38 of the Municipal Finance Management Act. Maepa's inference that this standard process somehow reflects on the city's total inability to spend grant allocations and deliver services is misguided Part of the process in terms of this notice from National Treasury to stop a portion of the grant funding, is to allow the City of Tshwane, or any Municipality for that matter, 7 days to make representations why this grant funding should not be stopped. The City of Tshwane administration will comply with this aspect and provide the reasons why certain funds were not spent as planned and motivated why these proposed reductions should be reconsidered. Maepa prematurely and seemingly purposefully announced the wrong figures given that National Treasury has not made a final decision yet. The DA will as always respect the National Treasury processes and comply at all times. We are however concerned about the non-spending of grant funding and this will be a very serious focus area for the incoming Mayor, Cllr Randall Williams. The residents of Tshwane deserve to receive services that can be provided through the spending of grant funding and the reasons for underspending will be thoroughly investigated and acted upon. We assure the residents that any impact, however small, as a result of the identified under-expenditure will be monitored and managed carefully. The DA will always remain accountable to the residents of Tshwane. The DA treats the lies and deliberate misinformation distributed by Maepa and the ANC with the disdain it deserves. Issued by Mare-Lise Fourie, MMC For Finance, City of Tshwane, 20 February 2020 