Suspension of Mathapelo Nkopane by Woolworths for wearing Isiphandla a gross violation of her fundamental rights 10 February 2020 The ANC has noted with regret the suspension of Mme Mathapelo Nkopane at Woolworths in Blairgoware, Johannesburg, for wearing her cultural wristband, Isiphandla, after she performed an ancestral ceremony, is a gross violation of the fundamental law of the land. The suspension of Mathapelo Nkopane is not only an unfair labour practice but a violation of her right to practice African religion which has the same status and protection with all other religions such as Judaism, Christianity and Islam under our Constitution. Our Bill of Rights guarantees all South Africans the right to practice their own religions. Isiphandla, like the Rosary in the Catholic church, the crucifix in the Christian church in general and the Jewish and Moslem Skull Caps (Fez), has the same status under our Constitution. Our icon, Nelson Mandela, said that African religion is no longer a superstition that must be superseded by other forms of religions. He also foregrounded Ubuntu or Botho, the central tenet of African religion as a humanist philosophy which will assist all South Africans, both black and white, in their efforts to build a socially cohesive nation. Our triple heritage of Judaism, Christianity and Islam, including African religion believe in the four spiritual or Light Beings (the Kheru) before the throne of God. These four Holy Beasts are known as the Cherubim in Judaism and as the al Karibuyan in Islam. One of these four Holy Beasts is called Mundu or Fa Ham in the African Religion of Light (Karaism). This Holy Beasts, Mundu or Fa Ham, was the most ancient spiritual being symbolised by a goat. The name Mundu in Isidebele, Umuntu in Isizulu and Motho in Sesotho are the roots of the humanist philosophy of Ubundu or Ubuntu and Botho. The Cherubim in Judaism and al Karibuyan in Islam and the Kheru in Karaism, the Sun centered spiritual philosophy or Religion of Light, are intermediaries between God, nature and humanity. The wearing of Isiphandla reconnect the practitioners of African religion with God, nature and the ancestors. This practice contributes immensely to our efforts to combat the deepening moral degeneration and social ills such as femicide, gender based violence, drug and alcohol abuse. African religion has major the role to play in the renewal of our society and we call on all South Africans, including businesses and sports organizations to embrace all religions and their cultural practices. This is the only option for building a socially cohesive, prosperous and peaceful South Africa. The animal skin wristband, Isiphandla, worn by practitioners of African religion has the same status with Rosary in the Roman Catholic church, the crucifix in the Christian church, the skull cap (Fez) in the Judaism and Islam. The wristband, Isiphandla is made of the skin of the goat which symbolizes the most ancient Man, Mundu or Fa Ham, who is one of the four spiritual or Light Beings as the ("Kheru") before the throne of God. Issued by Ace Magashule, Secretary General, ANC, 10 February 2020