EFF statement on the proceedings of the Eastern Cape SOPA 25 February 2020 On Monday of the 25th of February 2020, the EFF Eastern Cape participated in the State of the Province Address (SOPA). Similarly to the experience of the EFF caucus in the North West, the EFF caucus in the Eastern Cape was met with the brutality of unidentifiable security personnel when it raised issues pertaining to the governance of the province. The most foolish reason used to run away from accountability by the Speaker of the Provincial Legislature was an objection to the attire of the EFF, being the red overalls. These are the same overalls that the EFF wears in the National Assembly and for arms of government beneath the National Assembly to attempt to enforce ridiculous dress codes not only reveals ideological inferiority but a gross misreading of laws that govern legislatures. Instead of enlightening the legislature on their job strategy for the province and on the plan to provide fishing licenses to rural communities in order to open up the maritime economy to rural people, the Speaker chose to unleash bouncers on the opposition. Instead of providing an update on factories that have been revived according to the Premier Mabuyane's commitment last year, providing an update on the Isiqalo Youth Fund and providing a turnaround strategy in place for collapsing municipalities, the Speaker chose to have a nonsensical obsession with the clothing of the EFF. There seems to be a deliberate attempt to target members of the EFF and do to them what the ruling party failed to do at the State of the Nation Address. This is to victimise EFF caucus members for attempting to hold the ruling governments in provinces accountable. It is regimes of fascists that use violence against the opposition in order to escape questions on their governance capacity. We therefore call for an inquiry on the proceedings of the Eastern Cape SOPA and maintain our call for the same to be done in the North West. We will not tolerate the victimisation of EFF Caucuses for doing the tasks enshrined in the mandate of the EFF, which is accountable and transparent governance. Issued by Vuyani Pambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 25 February 2020