Gauteng Department of Health strengthening safety at health facilities 2 February 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_0',112,'0','0']));Gauteng Department of Health in a bid to ensure safety and security of patients and staff continues to put measures in place in the health facilities. The safety and security of our patients and staff is of paramount importance for the system to function optimally and achieve better healthcare outcomes. During the Gauteng Department of Health budget vote which was tabled on 30 July 2019 MEC Bandile Masuku set aside R600 million towards improved safety of patients and staff in the public health facilities. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));Gauteng Department of Health has taken the following actions to reinforce measures in the health facilities. A Departmental Priority Committee that meets each month has been established and is chaired by the HOD. The Department is in a process of implementing the deliverables of the Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) that was signed between National Department of Health (NDoH) and SAPS. As part of improving security in our facilities Gauteng Department of Health (GDoH) actively participates in the Provincial Joints Committee Structure which is a multi-sectoral Provincial structure chaired by the South African Police Service. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_2',114,'0','0']));As a result of the MOA, which covers all safety and security related matters, the security stakeholders namely Provincial SAPS, EMPD, Midvale Metro Police, West Rand Metro Police and the South African National Defence Force are all participating in the Provincial Structure. A GDOH Security Master Plan has been developed and approved by both the HOD and the MEC as a working document that guides security related interventions to the Department. The plan was developed together with Provincial SAPS and was also discussed at the District Security Committees that have already convened in this current financial year. District Security Committees through which all Security related incidents are discussed have already been established for the five Gauteng Districts. eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_4',115,'0','0']));A Safety and Security Campaign for Health care workers and healthcare facilities Document has been developed and was tabled at the GDOH Priority Committee meetings in December 2019 and January 2020. All facilities are prioritised and treated with urgency when incidents take place. Facilities with recurring incidents were prioritised as Hotspots, and these Hotspots are not meant to remain Hotspots for a long duration. Districts are in a process of identifying new Hotspots for the purpose of re-prioritisation of interventions for all stakeholders. The Security Conditional Assessment process is underway. The 32 facilities that provide 24 hour service are prioritised for this process. This process will inform Bill of quantities for each facility when the Department goes on tender to regularize the current security arrangement. The Department has moved speedily in upgrading infrastructure where security breaches have occurred, installing boom gates, and CCTV cameras. During the Festive period, few of the facilities that required urgent security interventions were prioritised and attended to. The department is committed to ensuring the safety of both patients and staff. Issued by Philani Mhlungu, Media Liaison Officer, MEC for Health, 2 February 2020