DA calls for clear timelines on SASSA’s new database for rejected Special Covid-19 R350 grant 1 July 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[468,60],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_2',112,'0','0']));The Minister of Social Development, Lindiwe Zulu, must give clear timelines on when and how the new review process for the special Covid-19 Social Relief of Distress grant of R350 will come into fruition to avoid the confusion that has muddied the payment of these grants thus far. On Tuesday, South African Social Security Agency (SASSA) indicated that another database for rejected applications will be brought on board to review those applications that didn’t meet the relevant criteria. While the Democratic Alliance (DA) is pleased that this database will give those, who have fallen through the gaps that have not received aid from UIF or SASSA, another opportunity to receive relief funding – we hope that SASSA will get its act together and that this is not more hot air. Since its inception the special Covid-19 Social Relief of Distress grant has been fraught with problems. Almost three months after the announcement of the grant on 21 April 2020, only one batch of payments have been made. eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));Questions about the status of applications often go unanswered, and many people that should have qualified for the grant have received no indication whether they will eventually receive payment, or if they have failed in their application and should appeal. Given the confusion and mishaps around this grant, the DA will write to the Auditor General of South Africa to request an audit of all the applications which SASSA had received, as well as the payments that have been made in relation to the special grant. We need to be certain that every cent that has been paid, went to a South African that truly needed the financial assistance. While SASSA overhauls their system and fine tunes their application and appeals processes, people are starving. This special grant was meant to save lives. It has failed to do so for many desperate South Africans. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));And though many sectors of the economy have opened up, unemployment is soaring, and the avenues of possible employment are shrinking rapidly. It seems as though SASSA and DSD have fallen into the trap of forgetting that they are working with people. And these people are the most vulnerable in society. They have no safety net and no other option but to pray that they will be lucky enough to receive the special Covid-19 Social Relief of Distress grant. Every moment that they do not receive payment their despair grows. They have families to feed. They need the grant now. They needed it yesterday. They cannot wait a moment longer. Issued by Bridget Masango,DA Shadow Minister of Social Development, 1 July 2020