DA extends its condolences to the friends and colleagues of Andrew Mlangeni 22 July 2020 Note to Editors: Please find attached soundbite from John Steenhuisen MP. The DA has learnt with sadness of the passing of struggle stalwart and former ANC MP, Andrew Mlangeni, who died at the age of 95 at 1 Military Hospital in Pretoria last night. His contribution to the fight against apartheid and the liberation of the people of South Africa – which included serving 26 years in prison following the Rivonia Trial in 1964 – will forever be remembered in our nation’s history with reverence and respect. As the last surviving defendant in the Rivonia Trial, he represented an era of struggle icons that included Nelson Mandela, Walter Sisulu, Ahmed Kathrada and Denis Goldberg. His passing now brings an end to that particular chapter of our history. Mlangeni was a firm believer in the power of education to unlock people’s aspirations, and even managed to study towards his own BA degree while incarcerated on Robben Island. He also abhorred the corruption that has infected our state and government, and maintained that Jacob Zuma should return to Robben Island if found guilty. He is famously quoted as saying: “I did not go to prison for 26 years for people to steal from the poor.” He also had this to say about personal growth and development: “In judging our progress as individuals we tend to concentrate on external factors such as one’s own social position, influence and popularity, wealth and standard of education; but internal factors may be even more crucial in assessing one’s development as a human being: honesty, sincerity, simplicity, humility, purity, generosity, absence of vanity, readiness to serve your fellow men and qualities within the reach of the soul are the foundation of one’s spiritual life.” Our best possible tribute to Andrew Mlangeni would be to give expression to these honourable qualities as we seek to build a more just and inclusive South Africa through the power of education and a zero tolerance for corruption. That is the South Africa that he would have wanted to see. The DA extends our heartfelt condolences to his children and the rest of his extended family. We also extend our condolences to all his many friends and colleagues in the ANC where his passing undoubtedly leaves a massive void. He was a much-loved and respected figure in the party, and we wish them strength and comfort in this difficult time. Issued byJohn Steenhuisen,Leader of the Democratic Alliance, 22 July 2020