EFF statement on the corruption by Eskom COO 21 July 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_2',112,'0','0']));The Economic Freedom Fighters notes the release by Eskom of the investigation done by Advocate Cassiem on the allegations of impropriety against their Chief Operating Officer, Jan Oberlhozer. Advocate Nazeer Cassiem concluded his report on the 4th of April 2020, and in it, he concludes that Jan Oberlhozer must be disciplined for a complete disregard of Eskom policies. On the allegations that Oberlhozer actively promoted the interest of Aveng, a company that has conducted business with Eskom, and which is now litigating against Eskom, by instructing a subordinate to pay the company an amount of R42 million, Advocate Cassiem found that Oberlhozer owes a duty of good faith to his employer, and recommended that: "a disciplinary process be initiated in order to enable proper ventilation of this issue to be determined in a disciplinary hearing. More so, having in mind the intervention of representatives of the Zondo Commission who have made, it would appear, certain preliminary findings on this very issue. Eskom must factor into consideration that such payment is presently part of litigation between Eskom and Aveng. However, in the interest of transparency, accountability and fair play, there is no reason why this issue cannot be the subject matter of a disciplinary hearing. " eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));The report also finds that Oberlhozer did not excuse himself from deliberations that concerned Stefannuti Stocks, a company he has shares on. It is now common knowledge that Steffanutti Stocks got an overpayment of an amount of RI billion from Eskom. To this day, there has been no proper explanation as to why this happened. We reiterate our call that the Eskom Board must institute disciplinary proceedings against Oberlhozer for flagrant disregard of company policies, and for corruption. They must do this even if the shareholder representative, Minister Jamnandas is still keen on protecting Oberlhozer. The incessant noise about saving Eskom from corruption will be considered hollow if the company refuses to take action against such clear cut violations of company policies. We cannot understand why Eskom has mounted such a spirited defence of Oberlhozer, and the only conclusion we can arrive at is that it is his white skin that protects him. For far too long, the media and big companies have driven an agenda that seeks to make corruption synonymous with black people. White people are allowed to loot without consequences. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));Oberlhozer is a beneficiary of this twisted logic, which benefits white thieves and protects them from censure. We will not let this matter go until he is brought to book, together with each and every person who has used Eskom as a treasure trove before. Oberholzer must immediately be suspended pending the disciplinary process and his greatest protector, Minister Jamnandas must resign because we cannot allow a Minister who protects corruption when it is done by his white friends. The EFF Treasurer-General OmphileMaotwe will be opening a criminal case against the COO of Eskom, and we will approach the court for an order to compel Eskom to act against the COO. Issued by Vuyani Pambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 21 July 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_5',115,'0','0']));