EFF statement on the planned further annexation of Palestinian land by racists Israel government 30 July 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[468,60],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_2',112,'0','0']));The EFF condemns the recent public cabinet statements of the Israel regime to further annex more land of the Palestinians with effect from 1 July 2020 than they have annexed in the past century. This brazen act of thuggery by warmongering Israel apartheid state is supported by U.S. President Donald Trump's discredited partisan 'peace plan'. The EFF rejects this barbaric act of aggression by the U.S. and Israel and calls on the international community to reject it with the contempt it deserves. We call on peace-loving citizens of the world including those from Israel and Palestine to resist and put pressure on the Israel junta to desist from its inhumane policy of annexation to deprive the people of Palestine their land and right to self-determination. eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));We call on the South African government, governments of the African state and all member states of the United Nations to show displeasure against the decision of the Israel government. These measures should include but not limited to recall of country diplomats, deporting Israel government representatives back to Tel Aviv, closing down of South Africa and all other countries' diplomatic offices at Tel Aviv and occupied Jerusalem. The EFF calls upon African Union members states to demand an urgent meeting of the Security Council to reflect on this Israel conduct that has a potential to be a threat to international peace as it serves to incentivise acts of terrorism and fundamentalist extremism on both sides of the conflict. Israel and U.S. have an obligation to respect, uphold and promote International Human Rights Law of the 1949 Geneva Convention on occupied territories and numerous decisions and resolutions of both the United Nations General Assembly and Security Council. The conduct of U.S. and Israel flies in the face of the absolute prohibition against the annexation of occupied territories, and this amounts to self-help and undermines the basic tenant of international law against self-help by occupying powers. The civilised world has prohibited territorial acquisition through war and annexation. The EFF reiterates the United Nations Resolution 2334 to "demand that Israel immediately and completely cease all settlement activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and that it fully respect all of its legal obligations in this regard." We are unapologetic in the condemnation that of "all Israel measures aimed at altering the demographic composition, character and status of the Palestinian Territory occupied since 1967, including East Jerusalem, including, inter alia, the construction and expansion of settlements, transfer of Israeli settlers, confiscation of land, demolition of homes and displacement of Palestinian civilians, in violation of international humanitarian law and relevant resolutions," This resolution is the highest resolve and the only possible solution to lasting peace in the region. The time to act is now, least Morocco and other belligerent rogue states follow suit. Issued by Vuyani Pambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 30 July 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_4',115,'0','0']));eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_5',115,'0','1']));