DA requests President Ramaphosa to include all Covid-19 contracts in Gauteng to SIU investigation 27 July 2020 Note to Editors: Please find attached a soundbite by Siviwe Gwarube MP, DA Shadow Minister of Health.eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_3',112,'0','0'])); The Democratic Alliance (DA) will be writing to President Cyril Ramaphosa to make the case that all Covid-19 service contracts that were awarded by the Gauteng Department of Health be included in the Special Investigative Unit (SIU) proclamation he announced last week. Over and above the controversial R124 million personal protective equipment (PPE) tender that was awarded to Royal Bhaca Projects – a company with deep connections within the ANC – there are many other companies and organizations which have inappropriately and illegally gained millions from this crisis which must be investigated. This is why all contracts awarded by the Gauteng Department of Health must be reviewed as a matter of urgency. Only the President can direct the SIU on key areas of focus for their investigation. Considering his commitment to combating corruption associated with this pandemic, he should not hesitate to place all these contracts under the spotlight. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));It is important to note that the presidential proclamation is yet to be made public following the president’s announcement. I will be urging the President in the correspondence to him today to ensure that this brief to the SIU is as comprehensive as possible. There are many companies with no track record in supplying medical supplies; which were established weeks before being awarded multi-million contracts; with direct ties with political office bearers which must be investigated. The ramp looting of state resources cannot be a something that is retrospectively investigated. Those who steal public money or inappropriately obtain government contracts must be stopped in their tracks. The issue of Gauteng contracts goes far beyond what has been reported. There are plenty of other companies with similar ties to politicians which must be investigated. It is clear that despite the fact that legislation is unambiguous about members of the executive being involved in the procurement processes of their departments, there are companies connected to them and their family members being awarded contracts under the veil of secrecy. It is unconscionable that there are vultures who are standing by and looting public coffers while there are patients in parts of this country who are fighting each other for oxygen tanks and healthcare workers who are without PPE. This disgusting trend in our country can only be stopped when law enforcement agencies are empowered to act without fear or favour and prosecute the politically connected elite. The DA will not rest until we expose those who continue to pillage public money. Issued by Siviwe Gwarube,DA Shadow Minister of Health, 27 July 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_4',114,'0','0'])); 