DA calls for final year teaching students to assist at under-capacitated schools 14 June 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) calls on the Department of Basic Education (DBE) to engage Universities and FET Colleges on possible ways in which final year teaching students, who are currently distance learning, can assist in capacitating schools during the lockdown. In response to a DA parliamentary question, Basic Education Minister, Angie Motshekga, revealed that 16 168 teachers have indicated that they suffer from comorbidities. While the department has indicated that substitute teachers will be appointed for those teachers who cannot report to work, it is not clear at this point whether there are enough substitute teachers to capacitate affected schools. The DA has engaged with a number of teachers over the past weeks who have reported that they are currently under immense pressure due to the increased tasks that they have to perform per day. Among other duties, teachers are now required to teach additional classes due to social distancing requirements, record lessons for learners who suffer from comorbidities, online teaching, and have to fill in for teachers who are at home. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));Never has there been a greater need for an effective effort by the DBE to capacitate schools by bringing in more teachers. The DA firmly believes that Universities and FET Colleges can play a critical role in this regard. If implemented properly, final year teaching students could assist schools and teachers with lesson planning, class supervision and teaching as part of their practical training. By bringing in final year students, schools will not only have the capacity to ensure a quality education for our learners, but these future teachers will also receive the necessary training to complete their academic year. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));Our entire education system is dependent on teachers who are the front-line workers in classrooms, so it is critical that teacher are taken care of to prevent burnout. Education must be given the necessary resources to effectively carry out its objectives while ensuring adherence to health and safety protocols. Failure to do so may result in more cases of teachers experiencing chronic stress resulting from being overloaded with work. Issued by Nomsa Marchesi, DA Shadow Minister of Basic Education, 14 July 2020