DA oversight on Lesotho border exposes serious security concerns 18 July 2020 Note to Editors: Please click here for a video and here and here for photos. Communities residing along the Lesotho border in the Free State, especially farmers and their employees, are regular victims of cross-border crime. This week I conducted an oversight visit to the Lesotho border between Fouriesburg and Clarens. Although the South African National Defence Force (SANDF) are deployed along this border, cross-border crime continues unabated. Our rural communities along this border are regular victims of farm attacks, theft of livestock, vehicle, equipment and various other crimes. The oversight visit to the border indicates that there is no fence or any other hindrance to people from crossing the border. Two armed SANDF soldiers were seen sitting next to a crossroad several kilometres from the border. With the Caledon River reduced to a stream as a result of severe drought, there is no other hindrance for people or stolen livestock from crossing this border. The South African government have a responsibility to protect its citizens and the country’s territorial integrity, which it is failing to do. Since the closure of the commando’s between 2005 and 2008 for political reasons by the ANC-led government, the DA immediately supplied the government with alternative policy options. The DA has subsequently updated an alternative Rural Safety Plan, implemented a rural safety working group with representatives in every province, requested a debate in parliament on rural safety and is attempting to get farm attacks declared hate crimes. The DA in the Free State Legislature (FSL) are supporting our colleagues in Parliament with their comprehensive initiatives to address this serious threat to food security, the safety of our citizens and their property. The DA in the FSL have also submitted a private member’s bill, the Community Policing Bill, which if passed will among others allow for accreditation and support for farm and neighbourhood watches. The DA regards every crime in a serious light, especially against the community that feeds our nation. Every subsistence, emerging and commercial farmer as well as their employees are national assets. As a water scarce country, we cannot afford to allow the lack of security at our borders to destabilise our food production as well. Without food and water our country will face a resource rebellion from citizens. Issued by Roy Jankielsohn, Leader of the Official Opposition in the Free State Legislature, 18 July 2020