Eskom withdraws its operations in parts of Khayelitsha and the area of Bardale in Mfuleni 20 July 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0']));Eskom fears for the safety of staff after two violent incidents occurred involving Eskom vehicles. The first vehicle was stoned and set alight by protestors in Khayelitsha. The driver managed to escape unharmed. The second vehicle was stoned in the Bardale area in Mfuleni. The employees managed to escape both incidents unharmed and evacuated the area safely. The current violent protests around Cape Town are allegedly due to the recent spike in land invasions. “Eskom strongly condemns the harassment of its employees who are simply carrying out their duties. We have taken the decision to withdraw all Eskom services to parts of Khayelitsha and the entire Bardale area in Mfuleni. Unfortunately customer faults will not be attended to until these areas are declared safe for Eskom to return,” stated Alwie Lester, General Manager for Distribution, Western Cape. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0']));The parts of Khayelitsha where services have been withdrawn are: Sections A; B; C; D; E; F; G; H; I; J; RR, DD, DT and BM Thembani; eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_4',114,'0','0']));Khwezi; Bongweni; Site B; eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_3',115,'0','0']));Site C; Eskom is working closely with the local SAPS and Eskom Security Services to ensure the safety of its staff, while working in these areas. We emphasize our call to the community to support Eskom and report incidents by contacting the Eskom Toll-Free Crime Hotline 0800 11 27 22 or SMS Crime Line on 32211. Callers may remain anonymous. Issued by Eskom Media Desk, 20 July 2020  SAA: Mboweni’s commitment, under oath, welcomed – Geordin Hill-Lewis DA MP says minister has vowed not to use his ‘emergency’ powers to bail out the airline DA welcomes Mboweni’s commitment, under oath, not to use his "emergency" powers to bail out SAA 21 July 2020 Note to Editors: Please find an attached soundbite from Geordin Hill-Lewis MP, DA Shadow Minister of Finance The Democratic Alliance (DA) welcomes Finance Minister Tito Mboweni’s categorical commitment, under oath, not to use his "emergency" powers to bail out South African Airways (SAA) and that there is no "imminent" plan to do so. This means the DA has achieved its immediate goal of preventing this bailout from happening secretly, behind the scenes, as happened previously when former Minister MalusiGigaba, used his "emergency powers" under Section 16 of the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA). Due to Minister Mboweni's commitment not to do the same thing, the DA has removed its application from the urgent court roll. However we have retained our application on the normal court roll, should the need arise in future to prevent the Minister using Section 16 of the PFMA for the same purpose. The DA is resolute that it would be wrong for SAA to be bailed out once again, at public expense, while millions of people face such hardship.  The country faces so many more urgent needs right now. On the basis of Mboweni's commitment we are satisfied that there is no need for an urgent hearing, although we remain on high alert for other illegitimate attempts to fund SAA. We have written to the Minister’s lawyers accordingly, and that letter is available here (insert link). However, Minister Mboweni’s affidavit, belatedly filed in response to the DA's court challenge, raises new alarms about how SAA might be bailed out using other means. Most worryingly, he suggests using pension funds to “invest” in SAA, which raises the prospect of the Public Investment Corporation being forced to give money to SAA. The DA will oppose any publicly-funded bailout of SAA, whether through direct cash, government guaranteed loans, or an attempt to abuse pension funds. Minister Mboweni should do the right thing and refuse any government financial support for SAA. Issued by Geordin Hill-Lewis,DA Shadow Minister of Finance, 21 July 2020