NW’s planned 500-bed field hospital remains an empty plot  17 July 2020 Note to Editors: Find attached soundbites in English and Setswana by DA North West Member of Health Portfolio Committee, Freddy Sonakile. In his recent response to a parliamentary question posed by the Democratic Alliance (DA) on field hospitals, the Minister of Health, Zweli Mkhize, confirmed that the 200-bed field hospital designated to the Bojanala district, was close to completion. The Minister, however, failed to report on the progress of the additional 500-bed field hospital that was embarked on in May 2020 already. The North West Department of Health’s inability to steer the province through untold turbulent times, coupled with the sudden surge in Covid-19 infections, necessitated an urgent oversight inspection. After nearly two months, the allocated land situated at Job Shimankane Tabane Hospital in Rustenburg, remains empty. Councillor Luan Snyders visited the site. (See pictures here and here) The DA will write to MEC Sambatha to request feedback on the state of affairs. The MEC should provide reasons for the delay and also supply the timeframe in which this hospital will be completed. In a media statement released earlier this month, the MEC cautioned about the “sharp increase in the number of positive cases and also deaths.” The latest situational report reveals that there are currently more than 11 891 confirmed cases in the province, 2 694 recoveries and 48 deaths. Rustenburg alone recorded 6 353 cases, with 4 792 active cases. Despite the earlier projections that the province was to reach the infection peak period around this time, the Department missed an opportunity to prepare the required number of beds in anticipation of the surge in infections. With the current infection rate, the 435 standard beds, 33 high care beds and 55 ICU beds will simply not suffice. With an impending crisis of this magnitude, it is unthinkable that the completion of the field hospital is not prioritised. The lockdown was intended to give Government time to prepare for the inevitable surge in infections and the delay conveys a message of utter contempt to every resident that lost their jobs in this time. Now, by admission of President Ramaphosa, we are in the eye of the storm and the time for planning has long passed. The lack of leadership within this Department is evident and we reiterate our call for the removal of the administrator, Jeanette Hunter. Issued by Freddy Sonakile, DA North West Member of Health Portfolio, 17 July 2020