As Ramaphosa dithers, DA exposes fresh allegations that ANC’s ‘Clyde’ turned the Public Service Commission into his own personal harem  23 July 2020 After the Democratic Alliance (DA) last week laid criminal charges against the ANC’s own "Bonnie and Clyde" bandits, we have been inundated by new whistle-blower reports alleging wide-scale corruption and mismanagement at the Public Service Commission (PSC). In one of the letters, sent to the DA by a group calling themselves “employees of the Public Service Commission who believe in the rule of law, justice and integrity”, fresh allegations are leveled against the Director-General (DG) and ANC cadre, Dr Dovhani Mamphiswana. The DA previously exposed an investigative report which found that Mamphiswana had illegally chaired a selection panel that appointed his unqualified mistress and the mother of his child, Boitumelo Mogwe, to the position of Chief Director for Ethics, where she earns a salary of over R1.3 million per year. On the basis of this report, the DA laid fraud and corruption charges against the two looting lovers. But it appears that “Bonnie” Mogwe was not the only recipient of “Clyde” Mamphiswana’s illicit largesse. The DA can today reveal new whistle-blower allegations that Mamphiswana has also fathered a second child with yet another senior official at the PSC. The DA is currently keeping the identity of Mamphiswana’s second mistress at the PSC confidential. According to whistle-blowers, in addition to promoting Mogwe to head up ethics at the PSC, Mamphiswana has also abused his power to influence the appointment of his second lover and mother of his child to a senior position within the PSC, which comes with a salary in excess of R1.5 million. Insiders allege that the senior post “was advertised to suit [his second lover’s] qualifications and experience.” According to whistle-blowers, this is part of a pattern where Mamphiswana “had sexual relations with females who have all been promoted as a result of sleeping with him.” The DA is outraged by what appears to be a worsening spiral of nepotism, corruption and sexual exploitation at the PSC. The investigative report released by advocate Smanga Sethene from the Office of the State Attorney on 8 July already confirmed that Mamphiswana had illegally promoted one of his mistresses to head up ethics in the PSC. But the latest allegation that Mamphiswana also irregularly ensured that a second mistress was appointed to a senior position shows that there truly are no limits to the depravity of ANC cadres who have captured the public service. This brings a whole new meaning to the extent to which ANC cadres are screwing the taxpayers of South Africa. Yet, even more disturbing is the assertion made by the whistle-blowers that President Cyril Ramaphosa is well aware of these abuses, as all of the information submitted to the DA this week was also sent to Ramaphosa. It is time to ask why Ramaphosa steadfastly refuses to act against Mamphiswana, who as DG reports directly to the President. Does Ramaphosa simply not care about the sexual exploitation of female officials by predatorial ANC cadres? Does he not care that some of the most senior officials in South Africa’s premier anti-corruption watchdog have abused their power and sexual relationships to secure multimillion Rand salaries at the expense of the people of South Africa? The DA has already submitted a parliamentary question to Ramaphosa about what he intends to do about the allegations. In the light of this new information, we will also be writing to Ramaphosa demanding that he launch a full investigation by the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) into all aspects of the PSC’s work. Our country is in grave danger when the premier public sector anti-corruption watchdog has itself been corrupted by ANC cadres. At the same time, we are also compiling all of the whistle-blower evidence, which we will use as part of possible court proceedings if Ramaphosa continues to fail in his constitutional duty to promote a high standard of professional ethics in the public service. Issued by Leon Schreiber, DA Shadow Minister for Public Service and Administration, 23 July 2020