WAITING FOR THE ANCIEN REGIME TO DIE (PART II) The first article in this series can be read here. What next?eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_2',112,'0','0'])); So what should we expect to happen? At present the ANC only wants to enable pension funds to invest in SOEs and infrastructure if they want to. They may be able to bully the PIC into doing this, but one may be certain that most pensioners will be extremely leery about putting their savings into the hands of the incompetent and corrupt people who run SOEs. Many will cash their pensions rather than allow that. If this happens, expect the ANC to legislate to force such investment by prescription. In which case watch a tidal wave of encashment. If you look at the plentiful bumf which reaches you from investment managers and advisers you will notice that currently many of them are saying that the best thing for South African investors to do is to put their money into fixed interest bonds. The vast bulk of this asset class is of course made up of government and SOE bonds, which means that other bonds have to compete with them on at least equal terms. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_0',113,'0','0']));After all, with a ten year government bond yielding around 9.5% and inflation down at 3%, what can be guaranteed to do better than that? But what does it say about an economy if nobody wants to invest in the shares of companies that make and sell things but prefers to lend to the government so that it can subsidise the consumption of the public service? Can any society possibly work like that? This is, in fact, the larger version of the situation in which productive private sector managers and workers pay taxes which help pay the salaries of vastly better paid public servants whose productivity is often negligible. Such are the contradictions of a “state-guided economy”. The thing to watch is the bond market. Already the downgrades by the ratings agencies are having an effect: the proportion of bonds owned by foreigners has shrunk from nearly 40% to under 31% as foreigners sell steadily. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_4',114,'0','0']));Secondly, it is becoming harder to sell ten year bonds because it is so difficult to believe anything the government says about the longer term, so the government is selling more and more short-dated stock. For the moment, enough buyers are still rolling up at bond auctions but as the year advances and the state's enormous appetite for money just keeps getting bigger, one suspects things will get a great deal tighter. The pressure for the Reserve Bank to intervene in the market will grow. The Treasury will desperately resist all the demands for extra spending, not only because it knows that will mean yet more borrowing but because it knows that if it gives way on anything it could be engulfed by an avalanche of demands. As this tightening happens Mboweni will have to warn the cabinet that if the state can't obtain enough local buyers for its bonds it will have to start offering bonds in stronger currencies in order to tap into foreign markets. This will really start the alarm bells ringing since South Africa's traditional strength has lain in its small dependence on foreign-denominated debt. The SACP and Cosatu will demand the imposition of tougher capital controls to trap foreign currency inside the country and to try to stop capital flight. This could well happen but we have been here before and seen the ingenuity and determination of South Africans in getting their money abroad. For many the very fact that the government is trying to stop you from acquiring hard currency is an extra incentive to ensure you get it. Dominoes falling, casting aroundeval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_1',115,'0','0'])); As in the 1980s the aim of such measures is to try to prevent the present turning into a future which you don't like. The trouble is that South Africa is anyway moving rapidly into a very different future. Wherever one looks one can see the old order collapsing. An obvious example is local government. A clear majority of all municipalities in the country are now dysfunctional, many of them bankrupt or hopelessly in debt. Whatever SAMWU does it can't obtain higher wages for municipal workers in such a situation. The collapse of these municipalities naturally produces a flight to the metropoles, further weakening the rating base of smaller centres. Until recently it seemed likely that we were moving towards the usual African model where local government only functioned in a handful of the largest cities. But even that is looking optimistic now. Bloemfontein and Pietermaritzburg are under administration, Durban is nearly bankrupt, Pretoria is a mess and Port Elizabeth is close to collapse. To drive through Johannesburg at night is uncomfortably like driving through Kinshasa: traffic lights don't work and nor do many street lights, manhole covers are sometimes missing and there are potholes everywhere. There are many areas where it's not safe to drive. This may be Africa's greatest city but it is a city on its uppers. eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-banner-1','ezslot_5',116,'0','0']));This decay at local level has major implications for the ANC, for local government has been a key part of its patronage network. Large numbers of councillors and council staff members have drawn salaries and allowances and a whole class of black entrepreneurs has feasted on municipal contracts and tenders. Much of this is now threatened and, quite clearly, major cuts are coming in state subsidies to local government. Meanwhile, some three million jobs have been lost in the lockdown, a fact which is producing desperation both in the workforce and in the unions. On June 29 the unions at SAA put out an angry statement: “Minister Gordhan must be stopped in his plans to retrench 3700 workers as these totally unacceptable actions cannot be carried out by a democratically elected government. In fact, in difficult economically depressed conditions such as what we are facing, government must be the employer of the last resort.” Amazingly, this notion of government as the employer of last resort has now made it into the ANC's economic policy document, doubtless as a result of Cosatu lobbying. There is, of course, no prospect of the state really employing all those who want jobs but what is notable is that jobs are here viewed not as something necessary to a productive enterprise but as welfare. This is, indeed, the ANC's central attitude: for workers, jobs are welfare; for the ANC they're patronage. Infrastructure spending is good not because it might produce better roads or ports but because it creates jobs. Thus the government's list of infrastructure projects contains many non-economic projects. Even if it's a white elephant (more stadiums anyone?) it means jobs. But now much of this part of the ANC's patronage network is threatened too. Similarly, SAA workers carried placards which read “We demand job security”. Here again, a job is welfare. The fact that SAA is losing money partly because it's overstaffed is irrelevant. It wouldn't matter if the job was digging holes and then filling them in again: job security would still be the demand. SADTU clearly has the same view of teaching jobs: the key thing is that they represent a revenue stream, not that the teachers actually go into the classroom. Unsurprisingly, SADTU want their members to refrain from teaching – though on full pay – more or less indefinitely (“until after the pandemic has peaked”). The fact that the Western Cape schools have been back in action for weeks now is not an example to be followed: it is a provocation requiring a hostile investigation by the Human Rights Commission. As may be seen, we are now dealing with the results stemming from mistaken policies which built upon earlier mistakes and so on all the way back to 1994. The result is that almost everything is going wrong at once. The effect can be quite giddying and, of course, the government is way out of its depth, casting around in a fitful and spasmodic fashion. The overall result is that things are out of control. And while the ANC elite may see this as an opportunity the mundane truth is that the ANC's all-important patronage structure is being undermined. All roads lead to a debt crisis Under these circumstances the progression towards a sovereign debt crisis seems all but certain. Mboweni has put across the idea that our national debt may climb steadily towards 100% of GDP in, say, four years time, and then a debt crisis will occur. Anyone familiar with Third World debt crises knows that this is not how it works. As the debt creeps up, the government casts around with increasing desperation for any lumps of capital that it can get its hands on. (In Zimbabwe the government has several times raided people's private bank accounts.) As tension increases even the smallest savers make heroic efforts to smuggle bits and pieces of money offshore. Trust and confidence in the government evaporates. No one invests. The situation in the bond market becomes increasingly frantic. From abroad only junk bond dealers show much interest and even some of them are short sellers. Even domestic investors become exceedingly wary. The pressure on the Reserve Bank to intervene to prop up the market becomes insistent. Then a chance event – perhaps another loony ANC economic statement, perhaps the bankruptcy of some notable local company, or just some random international event – causes a panic. The result is a blizzard of bond sales as investors bolt for the door. Insufficient buyers appear at the bond auction so the Reserve Bank has to intervene but that too creates further ripples of unease. The government, realising that it can't sell any more bonds for the moment (for it is borrowing now just to pay interest on its debt), is forced to declare a moratorium on debt interest payments. This creates even more panic. All of this can happen very quickly indeed. By this time the full-blown debt crisis has arrived. The moment that the government is unable to meet interest payments on its debt, creditors everywhere back away: who on earth lends to a government which isn't meeting its payment obligations? This creates an immediate crisis on three fronts. First, all international trade depends on credit, but if payment is uncertain who is going to export anything to South Africa? So key imports – medical supplies, machine spares, oil - freeze. Secondly, bond auctions become impossible. In the absence of buyers the Reserve Bank is the only possible bidder but even if it takes that route, printing extra money with which to buy bonds, word spreads immediately of this desperate measure, creating further panic. Thirdly, of course, the Rand plummets. If the panic starts on Monday by Thursday, at the latest, the Finance Minister is telling the cabinet that as things stand there will be no money with which to pay public service salaries or social grants. This produces total consternation: the day that public servants or grant recipients go unpaid is the day that the ANC collapses. The only solution is to obtain a large chunk of credit right away and a measure with which to steady the markets: the only possibility is an IMF bailout. Faced with this pressure and these horrid choices some very unlikely ministers will end up voting for the bailout. And a very unlikely president will do the same. There are, of course, variants to this scenario: there are a number of different routes into the crisis but in the end all roads lead to Rome. We have seen it many times in various countries. A point of some importance, though, is how the denouement is dealt with. The way NOT to do it is the way the ANC has simply run enterprises into the ground – Denel, SAA, SA Express etc – so they can no longer operate, pay their debts or pay wages but just lie gasping like a landed fish. The French call this a banqueroute sauvage. It is the worst option for it makes it all but impossible to save the enterprise or line up another buyer for it. Far better is to see trouble coming, act in good time, avoid the bad publicity of panic and collapse and, with luck, the enterprise can be saved. The analogy for saving a country is much the same. R.W. Johnson