EFF joins the country in celebrating Andrew Mlangeni upon his passing 22 July 2020 The EFF joins the country in celebrating a life well-lived: the life of Isitwalandwe/Seaparankwe Andrew Malangeni who passed on at 95 years old this morning. We extend revolutionary condolences to his family, friends, and the ANC. Baba Mlangeni's passing represents the end of a long era characterised by selfless, courageous and morally upright freedom fighters. He is amongst the first combatants of MkhontoWeSizwe, a generation that took up arms against the murderous racist apartheid regime. He is the last of the Rivonia Trial accused found guilty and sentenced to life imprisonment for taking up arms against the regime. In his entire life, despite the impeccable sacrifice he paid, Baba Mlangeni never felt entitled to any state position or benefits. After the advent of democracy, he continued to pursue life in a humble and accessible way with integrity. He was known in social circles as an excellent golfer and remained active in his community, helping the needy, to his last days. He is part of a generation that took a vow to fight and realise freedom in their lifetime. This is the essential inspiration we in the EFF take from him and his comrades. In their memory, we have taken a vow to also fight selflessly and fearlessly for the total economic emancipation of our people in our lifetime. Our own mission is to continue theirs and realise economic freedom in our lifetime. In the EFF, we too encountered the humility and accessibility of Baba Mlangeni with his infectious personality. We will always cherish our moment with him as an organisation when he came to support the Malema family during the passing of Koko Sarah Malema. This was at the height of a hotly contested election in 2019. Already in his advanced age, Baba Mlangeni travelled from Soweto to Polokwane, by road, to personally offer his condolences to a president of an opposition party, contesting his own organisation for political power. He was not scared to be associated with us, and he spent the whole day into the late hours of the evening. There was no way, as an organisation, we could not heal from so great and disruptive a loss, because a Robin Islander, a first-generation combatant of MK, Isitwalandwe, and member of the 'freedom in our lifetime generation" stayed with us from early in the morning to the late hours of the evening: his presence amongst us told us in no equivocal terms that we too are revolutionaries, for we were being affirmed by a titan of the liberation movement. At the cemeteries, Baba Mlangeni still took on his ailing knees, walked, picked up the shovel and poured the soil into the grave, the final resting place of Koko Sarah Malema. A gesture that stayed with us and will continue to warm our hearts for the rest of our days. His passing must be greeted with heartfelt joy. His passing must be welcome by all as a deserved rest for a man whose entire life was lived perfectly for the freedom of all. Above all, it must be greeted with admiration, a true standard to be emulated by all who remain behind. Like Baba Mlangeni, we must always be humble, knowing that the people owe us nothing, and we are never above them and their collective wisdom. Andrew Mlangeni lived a complete life. It is a life we all must desire and emulate. Long live the undying spirit of lsitwalandwe/Seaparankwe Andrew Mlangeni. May his soul rest in perfect and eternal peace. Salute! Issued by Vuyani Pambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 22 July 2020 