Why lifting the lockdown prematurely may be a really bad idea On Friday I was really disheartened to see that it appeared that the DA had added its voice to the chorus of those calling for the complete scrapping of lockdown. Close reading of what John Steenhuisen actually said, however, reveals that this is not quite correct and that the DA still wants to maintain elements of lockdown- it wants to end THIS lockdown and move to another . Prior till just recently all the major players calling for a suspension of lockdown have been conservatives and rightwing populists like Tory Brexiteers and Brazil's Bolsonaro. These are the same people who earlier had been denying that the virus was dangerous- and before that they were the people who were advocating for policies of neoliberal austerity. Well, it is good to see they have at least changed their minds on the subject of austerity. But they seem to have gone from one extreme to another- fantasizing that one can just wish away the grim social  consequences of biological disaster. The unfortunate neoliberal experiments with austerity do genuinely show that austerity has many adverse consequences: it's main effects are to exacerbate poverty,inequality and morbidity, but the numbers of extra deaths are fairly small usually of the same order as seasonal mortality- to see the numbers of deaths surge into the hundreds of thousands one needs to go to the deaths-of-despair due to other more extreme policies such as the deindustrialization due to a foolish or fanatical commitment to privatization and free trade. (The former Soviet Union saw more than a million deaths annually for about a decade.) So I think one can dismiss the rhetoric about "millions may die" and the mantra that "the cure is worse than the disease". Lockdowns are indeed dangerous and costly , but under conditions of severe threat, and where there is no better strategy on the table, they may be unavoidable. (South Africa,for example,lacks the capacity to follow the testing, tracking and tracing strategy they have followed in Taiwan- the one country to have near total succes with virtually no lockdown.) But there is more. For there is a very serious argument that lifting the lockdown prematurely, can bring on a situation which is even worse than either lockdown or doing nothing- because it combines the worst of both worlds. This turns on the question of credibility. Imagine a situation where the government proclaims the end of lockdown but the virus is only beginning to pick up steam. This is what I mean by prematurely ending the lockdown. In this case what happens is that the impatient foolish and desperate part of the population mills around on the streets creating a superspreading event for the virus; while the prudent part of the population cowers at home knowing the pandemic has a long way to go, and is too prudent and rational to reopen their shops businesses and offices- a de facto continuation of lockdown. And now, the government,having lost all credibility, has no believable way of actually improving the situation by ordering a return to work. It cannot credibly threaten to arrest several million people. This scenario is a pure thought-experiment: but something similar but less complicated has actually happened in Sweden- where the economy continues to languish, despite the lightest of lockdowns. Until the virus is widely believed to have been conquered, neither local nor international demand is going to rebound. From a more sophisticated point of view it is the virus which has caused the recession and lockdown is just one way in which the State can coordinate action to fight back. And we can turn to history for other related lessons. Perhaps the most basic lesson is that quarantine works. The policy was invented or discovered in the Renaissance- and the famous Italian economic historian Carlo Cipolla has shown that those states which were strong enough to enforce quarantine were immensely more successful in resisting or surviving plague, than those where the government was weak,or rejected science. Other lessons relate to the importance of the State's role in maintaining public morale. In the Great Depression of the 1930s the New Deal government followed deeply contradictory policies: the left hand turning on the spigot of stimulus whenever the right hand turned it off. But throughout whenever Roosevelt went on the radio to give one of his fireside chats the national mood lightened (and this showed epidemiologically- on the day when Roosevelt's election was publicly announced the suicide rate dropped dramatically.) I believe Cyril Ramaphosa is playing a similar role in our country today: his leadership is one of the most important assets we have- and should not be squandered. But it is also clear that, as in the 1930s, a lot of mistakes have been made. So I would plead that what we need is not a complete suspension of the lockdown but a move to a SMART LOCKDOWN. The policy needs to be adapted to different regions and groups: to move away from one-size-fits-all. Regions like the central Karoo where there is low density and no cases need to be set at level 1; while on the other hand dense settlements where there is no testing need to be kept on high alert. Arbitrariness should be avoided-it also destroys credibility. A more differentiated message is also more apt to be misunderstood- thought needs to be given on how to avoid propagating confusion. And new policies will be needed when the economic consequences become clearer for we are confronting something unprecedented- both a demand shock and a supply shock- in a traumatized nation recovering from many years of misgovernment- and with high levels of personal and corporate indebtedness. But it also needs to be realized that people and resources standing idle can offer opportunities to be mobilized to fight the virus. For example, unemployed office workers and underemployed teachers might be hired to work as health inspectors to help establish and enforce safety protocols in factories and offices. And guest-houses standing empty due to the collapse of the tourist trade could be used to provide isolation and shelter for members of especially vulnerable groups like the elderly , or people with endangering medical pre-conditions. Some government policies are bad and need to be changed; others are good, and just need to be properly explained and motivated; yet others again are good and it is just that the government lacks the capacity to deliver. Sometimes the private sector can step up to the plate- but not always, because this sector too lacks requisite skills or because market failure is real, and vitiates the positive response of private businesses. Hence I would also like to put in a plea for a force that is often forgotten- voluntary organizations-the original civil society. These should be especially important in reaching out to vulnerable groups, people at risk either from the virus, or from the unintended consequences of lockdown. Then there is also the fact that in times of widespread corruption and institutional failure, some of the most useful and constructive critical voices are coming from non-traditional sources. In the northern hemisphere, in addition to epidemiologists and economists. people are listening to mathematicians, educationalists,historians, and geographers. South Africans should do the same. (One example:Nick Spaull has developed an alternative plan for reopening the schools) And there are people making intelligent original suggestions in every single South African community. Professor Alex van den Heever has cogently argued that we have been complacently self-congratulating while frittering away the advantages of an early start and the worst is yet to come. So, to borrow a classic phrase: Now is the time for all good people to come to the aid of the country. - Kenneth Hughes, (Retired UCT academic,mathematician, and former Civil Rights activist.)