Premier Alan Winde conducts CTICC hospital site visit in preparation of Coronavirus Covid-19 hospital beds provision  Western Cape Premier Alan Winde today conducted a visit to the CTICC hospital to see how work is progressing in preparing the site. Once complete, the hospital will provide at least 850 intermediate care beds for COVID-19 patients. Today, Premier Winde viewed one of the wards, where construction has been completed, and beds have been installed. This is part of the Western Cape Government's plans to prepare the healthcare system for the peak of the COVID-19 pandemic. Premier Winde said: "We are continuously assessing the data available to us about the progression of the virus in the province, in order to respond appropriately. But we simply cannot do this alone. We require the help of every single person in this province to slow the spread of this virus. When you keep yourself safe, you keep your loved ones safe too. We each have a role to play in saving lives." The CTICC facility once open will provide intermediate care, such as the administration of oxygen and physiotherapy and has facilities for patients whose health may deteriorate while in the facility. The hospital will be staffed by 987 people including medical specialists, general practioners, nurses, physiotherapists and administrative and support staff. The hospital will also have a state-of-the-art digital x-ray machine, and will be entirely paperless to ensure that risk of infection is minimised. It will also have a specialised waste removal system to ensure that potentially contaminated waste is cared for. "One of the things that struck me in the hospital, is the sign above each bed which says 'beacon of hope and recovery'. We must remember our humanity in this pandemic- each and every statistic is a real person with their own hopes and fears, and family members and friends who love them very much. Unfortunately, patients will not be able to see their families or receive visitors while in this hospital, but I was pleased to hear that the hospital will have WiFi, which will allow patients to video call their loved ones." The facility has also carefully considered staff safety- with appropriate PPE required for treating patients. The staff showers and change rooms are also housed on a separate floor, so that they can shower and change before leaving the facility and going home. Premier Winde said: "The completion of the site is on track, and will start treating patients in a phased-in approach. It is our hope that this facility really is a beacon of recovery, and those entering its doors for treatment, receive the care they need so that they can get well and return home." Issued by Western Cape Office of the Premier, 26 May 2020  