EFF has contributed R6m to Covid-19 Solidarity Fund and challenges others to produce proof of payment 8 May 2020 The EFF has contributed R6 million to the COVID-19 Solidarity Fund. Accordingly, we publicly produce our Proof of Payment as evidence to our commitment. We thank the disciplined and dedicated EFF public representatives who have sacrificed a third of their salaries to contribute to the fight against the spread of COVID-19. We hope that these funds will contribute to the improvement of our public healthcare system, the purchase of Personal Protective Equipment for healthcare workers and the building of facilities in poor communities. Also, that those with whom the Solidarity Fund will do business will be black-owned or BEE compliant companies. We challenge all other persons, companies and formations that have made commitments to contribute to the Solidarity Fund also to produce Proofs of Payment. We call on the Ruperts, Oppenheimers, Patrice Motsepe, Naspers, Sanlam, Vodacom and Dischem, who have publicly announced that they will make donations to the Solidarity Fund to produce proofs of payment. We also challenge Ramaphosa and his cabinet members, MECs and other political parties, like the ANC and the DA, to produce proofs of payment. Furthermore, we challenge Ramaphosa to go beyond COVID-19 and also produce proofs of payment of all the contributions he promised to the Nelson Mandela Foundation from his monthly salary. Finally, we challenge Patrice Motsepe also to produce the proof of payment for the R3.5 billion he promised toward the acceleration of land reform. Motsepe made this announcement at the Global Citizen Festival in FNB Stadium, on the 2nd of December 2018. The EFF believes that anyone who cannot produce these proofs of payment has effectively lied or misled society for public relations purposes. There is indeed too much grandstanding in our country which must be exposed by demands for proofs/evidence. People and companies must provide evidence of their pledges as the EFF has done. It is high time we separated water from oil and return meaning into words; expose lies and liars amongst us. In conclusion, we reiterate our gratitude to all the EFF public representatives for contributing to a good cause. The EFF is not a rich party, neither is its constituency: yet, out of the little we have, we contribute because COVID-19 can only be defeated through human solidarity and cooperation. Issued by Vuyani Pambo, National Spokesperson, EFF, 8 May 2020