SADTU statement on plans to open post-school education sector in response to Covid-19  24 May 2020eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_2',112,'0','0'])); The South African Democratic Teachers’ Union (SADTU), the biggest union in the education and public service sector has noted the measures to open institutions of higher learning as presented by Higher Education, Science and Innovation Minister, Dr Blade Nzimande. We welcome the fact that the Minister’s presentation was centered on ensuring a balance between safeguarding lives while saving the academic year. The measures are in line with COVID 19 Level 3 regulations that allow for a maximum of 33% student population to return to campuses and residences on condition that they can be safely accommodated and supported in line with the health and safety protocols. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));Students will start contact tuition two to three weeks after the announcement of the Level 3 or 2 in order to allow for travel back to effectively prepare the campuses for the return. This clarity is critical and demonstrates the importance of caring for the students and workers. The collaboration between the Department, Digital Technologies, Electronic Network Providers and Electric Network Providers in order to ensure the zero-rating of education content sites of public universities, TVET and CET Colleges, Agricultural and Nursing Colleges is welcome. But we call for the speedy introduction of educational data bundles to all NSFAS students in universities and TVET Colleges so that they can access additional content that is not covered through the zero-rating. This should be attended to as a matter of urgency so that poor students can be on par with their rich counterparts who have access to materials that are not provided for in institutional websites. COVID 19 has exposed the critical situation of CET Colleges who have to depend largely on the Department of Basic Education for infrastructure. This sector will have to depend on the DBE to ensure that all the safety standards are met for learning to resume. We urge the Department to take seriously the issue of building the infrastructural capacity for the CET college system. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));We implore the institutions to abide by the guidelines set out by the Department and not seek to outshine each other. Let COVID 19 bring us all together and not further perpetuate the inequalities between the advantaged and previously disadvantaged institutions of higher learning. The institutions must ensure that psychosocial services are provided to both students and workers in order to build the required resilience as we fight against this virulent disease. We must ensure that hand hygiene is adhered to and that social distancing is not compromised at any given moment. Issued by Nomusa Cembi, Media Officer, SADTU, 24 May 2020