Illegally appointed Tshwane administrators a law unto themselves  31 May 2020eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0'])); The Democratic Alliance (DA) is concerned that residents of Tshwane have no one to call when experiencing service delivery issues within their communities. They have no direct access to the African National Congress (ANC’s) unlawfully deployed team of administrators when electricity outages or water cuts need to be escalated. The deployment of these administrators to the City of Tshwane continues to undermine the electoral choices that were made by the residents in 2016. They have not been elected by residents of Tshwane. They are illegally imposed with no identified unfulfilled obligations that they need to attend to as specified by the constitution. What is of more concern is that the administrators are making decisions now that could bind the city into future contracts and positions, all while they operate on an unelected mandate. They are imposing lasting consequences on the management of the city. The administrators are both players and referees. Wielding total power over the city and its finances. There is absolutely no level of accountability nor transparency. They account only to the ANC-led provincial government. The administrators are only allowed constitutionally to be in office for 90 days, with the Covid-19 crisis this could be extended well into September or even longer. Residents will not have their democratically elected representatives leading them during this time. The people of Tshwane suffered long enough under the uncaring ANC government which the city was relieved of when the DA took over administration in 2016. Now Tshwane residents are being subjected to this again due to the ANC hijacking the council in March. But the DA is in the process of rectifying the situation through the courts. The DA is confident in its Section 18 Application for the immediate implementation of the recent North Gauteng High Court judgment that was heard on Friday, which declared the dissolution of the Tshwane Council unlawful, will lead to a smooth transition back to DA leadership. Issued by Randall Williams, DA Tshwane Mayoral Candidate, 31 May 2020