Media Release: Update on the coronavirus by Premier Alan Winde As of 1pm on 13 May, the Western Cape has 4367 active cases of Covid-19, with a total of 6767 confirmed cases and 2283 recoveries. Total confirmed COVID-19 cases 6767 Total recoveries 2283 Total deaths 117 Total active cases (currently infected patients) 4367 Total number of tests 73589 Sub Districts Cape Town Metro: Sub-district Cases Western 805 Southern 636 Northern 471 Tygerberg 1104 Eastern 718 Klipfontein 844 Mitchells Plain 649 Khayelitsha 927 Total 6154 Sub Districts Non-Metro: District Sub-district Cases Garden Route Bitou 5 Garden Route Knysna 17 Garden Route George 17 Garden Route Hessequa 9 Garden Route Mossel Bay 21 Garden Route Oudtshoorn 3 Cape Winelands Stellenbosch 43 Cape Winelands Drakenstein 69 Cape Winelands Breede Valley 41 Cape Winelands Langeberg 4 Cape Winelands Witzenberg 182 Overberg Overstrand 17 Overberg Cape Agulhas 3 Overberg Swellendam 7 Overberg Theewaterskloof 10 West Coast Bergrivier 16 West Coast Matzikama 1 West Coast Saldanha Bay Municipality 10 West Coast Swartland 24    Unallocated: 114 The Western Cape has recorded an additional 7 COVID-19 deaths-bringing the total number of deaths from the virus in the province to 117 . We extend our condolences to the family and friends of those who have passed, at this time. We were saddened to hear the news today of the passing of ENCA cameraman Lungile Tom. Lungile was a regular fixture at many Western Cape Government events and was well respected and liked by members of the Western Cape cabinet and the entire Western Cape communications team. We send our condolences to his family and to his colleagues today. He will be missed. In line with COVID-19 protocols, ENCA contacted us this morning to alert us to the fact that Lungile had been the camera operator during last Thursday's digicon event. These digicons have been held digitally with the express purpose of ensuring that physical distancing can occur. Only a few television journalists are invited to attend in order to broadcast these news announcements. We also have strict hygiene protocols in place, with touch points sanitised, and everyone who entered the room was temperature screened and wearing a mask on the day. For this reason and on advice from the specialists, most of the attendees have been deemed casual contacts and not close contacts. day. In terms of good practice for workplaces, screenings will also be arranged for those Western Cape Government staff members who were in the room. Should any of them require testing, in terms of our established protocols, this will be arranged. Because I had a one-on-one interview with Lungile after the press conference, being in close range for some time, I am deemed a close contact and will now self-quarantine. It has been nearly seven days since our contact, and I will therefore go into self-quarantine for another seven days. Members of the public should be reassured that I have not experienced any symptoms associated with COVID-19, but if I do, I will have a test performed straight away. I will continue to work full steam ahead, from home. Because of our developed systems, I can continue to join all meetings, and will be overseeing our new hotspot targeted strategy. It is imperative that we take the utmost care and lead by example in our approach to COVID-19. Lastly I have also been in contact with the President to alert him to this situation as he was due to visit the province on Friday. The President has agreed to reschedule his visit given this development, and we thank him for his understanding. I really want to thank ENCA for taking a proactive approach in handling this matter, even at a time when they were grieving the loss of their colleague. This is what every person and company should do in such an instance. This is how we slow the spread and “flatten the curve”. In the coming weeks and months, we will see many more people becoming infected across the country and it is important that businesses respond appropriately when a staff member tests positive. The Western Cape Government has devised detailed protocols that indicate how to reduce the risk of infection in the workplace, as well as what steps to follow should an employee test positive. These can all be found here: Anyone experiencing symptoms which include a fever, cough, shortness of breath or sore throat is advised to contact the Western Cape provincial hotline on 021 928 4102 for advice on what steps to follow. Issued by the Western Cape government, 13 May 2020