Employment and Labourapologises for delay in capturing May UIF Coronavirus COVID-19 TERS claims 27 May 2020 The Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF) apologises for the freak break in its network which has affected plans to capture the May Covid-19 TERS online applications. The system which has been undergoing test run since last week was due to go live on Tuesday May 26, 2020 but a damaged fibre link between the UIF’s offices and the State Information and Technology Agency (SITA) put paid to those plans. “We would like to apologise to all our stakeholders and particularly our clients for this unfortunate turn of events and the resultant delays. We are doing everything in our power to ensure that the problem is resolved today so that we can start processing May applications immediately.  The fault of connectivity in Pretoria is due to a damaged fibre cable that links the UIF to the SITA’s datacenter”, said the UIF Commissioner TebohoMaruping. The UIF promises to ensure that once the link has been restored, it will do all it can to try and catch up on the time lost.  The UIF’s ICT system development team is on standby to ensure that as soon as the connectivity is re-established the system goes live. “We have received an avalanche of complaints because of this and we understand how this could be frustrating to our clients and stakeholders. I would like to assure each and every one of those who have been negatively affected that this was beyond our hands but will try to make up. It should be noted that in the last two months we have had peak traffic as a result of our lockdown relief benefits. In general we have managed to keep our heads above water under those circumstances and there is no reason why we will not push ourselves to do our utmost to catch up”, Commissioner Maruping concluded. He promised that the UIF will make a public announcement once the system has been restored. For more information contact: Issued by Makhosonke Buthelezi, Director UIF Communication, 27 May 2020