DA calls on Minister Zulu to protect unemployment grant applicants against opportunists 12 May 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) will write to the Minister of Social Development, Lindiwe Zulu, to request information on the measures her Department has put in place to protect applicants of the special R350 Covid-19 Social Relief of Distress grant against exploitation from opportunistic criminals looking to make a quick buck. The DA has tried to engage the Minister and the South African Social Security Agency (SASSA) several times on this topic. We have warned that criminals are waiting to strike, and implored upon SASSA to open its offices to help those applicants requiring assistance. While SASSA has opened its offices and allowed a third of its workforce to return, it’s not able to assist potential applicants of the special Covid-19 Social Relief of Distress grant. In no time criminal elements took the gap and are now taking advantage of vulnerable South Africans desperately trying to feed themselves and their families. The DA has seen “advertisements” of people offering their services, in some instances requesting a fee, to “help” vulnerable South Africans struggling to apply for the grant. And desperate South Africans are all too eager to pay these miscreants in order to find relief for their dire situations. (Kindly find attached examples of the "advertisement" here and here.) The Minister must ensure that those in her care are protected from criminals seeking every opportunity to prey on those left desperate and vulnerable. She simply cannot stand by and watch as criminals take advantage of our people. Where are the community care workers and volunteers the Minister promised would assist eligible South Africans without the resources to apply for these grants? The general public must have ready access to these individuals and ample information about the application process so that criminals are not able to take advantage of them. South Africans need to have easy access to vital information via adverts in newspapers, TV, radio stations and social media, on how they can apply for the unemployment grant. In a time where great uncertainty rules every day, ordinary South Africans cannot be left in the dark any longer. Promises made must be kept. People are dying from hunger and desperate for relief. Relief that was promised by Government and must now be urgently and efficient and with great transparency be delivered by the Minister and SASSA. Issued by Bridget Masango,DA Shadow Minister for Social Development, 12 May 2020