Solidarity presents code of good practice to many school principals 28 May 2020 Solidarity today presented a comprehensive code of good practice to many principals and governing bodies for a responsible return to schools that will not compromise health. The Code of Good Practice provides guidelines on how to manage the Covid-19 risk and how to comply with all the relevant legislation and regulations. The Solidarity Code of Good Practice wants to help parents to not have to make a choice between health and schools but to choose for healthy schools. The goal is to help schools minimise the risks surrounding the Covid-19 pandemic as much as possible. Solidarity understands parents’ uncertainty, and through this Code of Good Practice we want to help give parents more peace of mind. “Our children are precious to us. Our teachers are precious to us. We want to support our teachers so that they can work without compromising their health while our children can learn in a way that doesn’t compromise their health either,” Dr Dirk Hermann, Solidarity Chief Executive said. “While in the midst of the pandemic it is important that we manage the return of learners to schools in a responsible manner and Solidarity’s Code of Good Practice has been formulated with the very aim of achieving this in a practical way.” Solidarity actively wants to help find solutions. “Simply making demands is of no help. We came up with concrete solutions. Covid-19 is going to be with us for a very long time still, and we have to develop methods to live with the virus,” Hermann contends. Solidarity’s guidelines are comprehensive and will greatly assist schools to implement measures that can manage the safety of our children and teachers in a responsible way. “By assisting schools and teachers in this way, teachers are empowered through knowledge which they can actively apply in the classroom and on the school grounds so that our children and their teachers can resume the academic year in a way that will not compromise their health,” Hermann concluded. Issued by Dirk Hermann, Solidarity: Chief Executive, 28 May 2020