By overregulating food aid organisations, ANC takes a page from Stalin’s Holodomor-book on starving the population 19 May 2020 The ANC's overregulation of food aid in a country where more than a third of its population was already unemployed even before the lockdown regulations severely damaged the economy is conquering up ghostly images of Stalin's starvation of the Ukraine population between 1932 and 1933, which lead to the death of between 2,5 and 7,5 million people. The FF Plus considers the intended regulation of food aid by means of regulations proposed by the Minister of Social Development, Lindiwe Zulu, as highly problematic and as clear proof that the ANC government does not really care about the people of South Africa. This could be the direct cause of more people dying from starvation than due to Covid-19. eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_5',113,'0','0']));This kind of regulation comes straight from Stalin's textbook and the communist school of thought and it is clear that someone has been studying Stalin's precepts on the Holodomor policy for the oppression of a certain group of people. Small-scale farmers and kulaks were the ones predominantly victimised by Stalin. The FF Plus believes that any regulation that prevents people who are starving from obtaining food aid is in contravention of Section 11 of the Constitution, which guarantees the right to life, and that makes it disputable. Any organisation that is responsibly distributing food to needy people must continue to do so seeing as the government's decisions in this regard must first be tested in court. It is alarming to see how the ANC's modus operandi is starting to look more and more like communism through the centralisation of every single aspect of society. The time has come for the part of the population who are mostly affected by this, like the needy, to raise their voice and object to what the ANC is doing. The FF Plus will continue to fight back against the ANC's draconian dictatorship and will support all organisations that attempt to put an end to it in court. In the interim, the FF Plus will find out how many people have been admitted to hospitals due to diseases that relate to malnutrition and compare those statistics with the number of people who were infected with and died as a result of Covid-19. Issued by Anton Alberts, FF Plus national chairperson, 19 May 2020