DA wants distribution and connection of water tanks sped up in NC 6 May 2020 Note to Editors: Please find attached soundbites in English & Afrikaans from Harold McGluwa, MPL. The Democratic Alliance (DA) in Northern Cape is calling on COGHSTA to oversee the urgent distribution and installation of water tanks to municipalities across the province. This, as certain places such as Rietfontein and Van Wyksvlei, continue to struggle without any water. A SALGA report presented to parliament on 28 April 2020, indicated that the Northern Cape had received 668 tanks of which 387 tanks were installed and 281 tanks were sitting in the storerooms of municipalities awaiting distribution. A further 210 tanks were also still due to be delivered to the province. We all know that hand washing and good hygiene are essential to curb the spread of this disease. The DA is therefore concerned that, 40 days into lockdown, too many communities remain without water supply, placing their health and wellbeing at even greater risk. The affected communities are home to some of the province’s poorest and most vulnerable people in places such as Van Wyksvlei and Rietfontein in DawidKruiper municipality. These are people whose already cramped and impoverished living conditions pose the added threat of rapid spread, should the Coronavirus penetrate these areas. These are also communities where there are many elderly people and people with compromised immune systems, who would be more likely to suffer severe illness and even death, if they were to become infected with Coronavirus. These are the people who most of all need added protection against Coronavirus. The DA has written to MEC Bentley Vass, asking that he urgently takes ownership of the water tanks by ensuring that municipalities do not allow the tanks to grow cobwebs in storerooms or even disappear into the private yards of municipal officials, as has occurred at certain municipalities in the past. We specifically appeal to him to help speed up the delivery of the 45 tanks to Kai!Garib municipality as well as the connection of tanks in Rietfontein to the existing water infrastructure. This, as it is not sustainable nor hygienic for municipalities to continue filling water tanks via water trucks. Water is a key weapon in the fight against the Coronavirus pandemic sweeping across South Africa. More must be done to ensure that everyone has access to a constant and clean supply of water. Issued byHarold McGluwa,DA Northern Cape Provincial Chairperson & Chief Whip of the Provincial Caucus, 6 May 2020