Open letter to Mayor Mxolisi Kaunda Dear Mayor Kaunda, People often ask me if the new city leadership is any better than their predecessors. The answer is undoubtedly yes. Despite a few tough exchanges, our relationship is one of mutual respect and co-operation and you chair EXCO in a democratic and reasonable way. There have been a few positive changes, like the reinstatement of the Finance Committee, and things are somewhat more organised and timeous. But, to be fair, it was never going to be difficult to be better than Zandile Gumede. She was unfit to be Durban’s first citizen from the start and working with her was a painful experience. Her corrupt antics brought our beloved city to its knees and the effects are still felt daily in departments like DSW. My concern, Mayor, is that you have not made a clean break from her reign of terror and have ended up governing in her shadow. Change does take time but most things in eThekwini have not changed at all since you took office. The clearest indication of this is  presenting (and widely advertising, at great cost) a “business as usual” budget in a time of crisis. The budget is undoubtedly a careful balancing act but should have been completely re-worked in light of the covid-19 pandemic and its effects on our economy and society. I made that recommendation to you in a detailed proposal on the 19th of April. Durban is struggling. People’s food cupboards are bare, businesses are collapsing and bank accounts are empty. Our own municipal research shows that this will go on for the next year at least and 324 000 jobs will be lost. How then can we expect consumers to afford massive tariff increases and expect them to accept staff increases and performance bonuses? How do we expect ordinary people to survive? During yesterday’s Covid-19 Task Team meeting, you made an important point that officials shouldn’t sit in air-conditioned offices and forget people’s struggles. You were correct. Passing this budget will be just that- forgetting the struggles of the very people who put you in your office in the first place. When I was first elected to lead the DA caucus in eThekwini, the best advice I received was that you cannot lead on your knees. You have to have courage, and be prepared to stand on your feet and make hard decisions. The remainder of this month will be the truest test of your character and leadership to date. You’re no longer a MEC, wearing a reflector vest at roadblocks. You are the leader of almost four million people who are desperate for help. Tens of thousands of people have and will object to this budget. I hope you read some of those and understand what people are going though. Cut the tariffs, cut the increases and bonuses and make more relief available. If the officials can’t do the work, charge them and boot them out of their offices. Your ANC caucus has a voting majority in the eThekwini Council and can decide what to do. Whip them into shape, get that budget re-worked and lead on your feet. The lives and livelihoods of this entire city are on the line and in your hands and it is time for you to prove your mettle. Regards, Cllr Nicole Graham Leader: DA eThekwini