Even Mboweni misunderstands 13 May 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[250,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0']));A Twitter storm erupted around the head of Minister Tito Mboweni over the weekend. And understandably so. More people than he realised support the letter and the spirit of the Constitutional Democracy we became in 1994. Incautiously, Mboweni had tweeted the following: "The Leader of the DA, Hon Steenhuisen, must stay in his lane. You have no right to instruct our President to open the economy. That is disrespectful and unwarranted. Please delete your tweet!! Hayibi! Thixo!" It seems that Mboweni was looking for a little cover after openly disagreeing with cabinet decisions about the Lockdown reportedly taken with President Ramaphosa presiding. He went so far in disrespecting cabinet co-responsibility that he decried, also on Twitter but earlier in the week, the fact that it was like swallowing rocks having to support decisions with which he disagreed. It appears that as part of his tactics of playing for both sides, he now wanted to be thought of as this super-loyalist. He thought an obsequious tweet might help him with the president and the ANC. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0']));After all, they want absolute obedience and many of them in government have tin ears: they have not listened to what is happening. Instead of willing compliance by our citizens, signs of mounting resentment and outright ignoring and even defiance of the regulations are becoming apparent. Mboweni knows that but cannot admit it. He ignores the fact that John Steenhuisen has a role and is paid by parliament – and thus the people – to be the leader of the opposition. It is Steenhuisen's job to hold the government and the president to account, to criticise and point out shortcomings and to propose alternative policies that he and his party consider to be in the best interests of South Africa. This is precisely what Steenhuisen has done. He believes the Lockdown, originally strongly supported by the DA and by almost everyone, has now served its purpose and needs to be ended. However much one is apprehensive about the future course of the virus, the economy of the country is on its knees. We must save lives and save the economy. It is not an either/or; it is both. Steenhuisen's party has suggested in detailed terms exactly what the government should be doing and is not doing at this stage, so many weeks after the Lockdown started. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0']));He also points out that a number of the regulations are senseless, counter-productive, job-destroying and quixotic on the part of rogue-ministers given too much power by the president. This has resulted in an increasing loss of confidence by the public in the performance of the government, led by the president. Mboweni, currently the darling of the media, has a bad record of refusing to listen. Two decades ago, he and his socialist and communist friends designed and rammed through parliament a labour dispensation suitable for a rich Scandinavian country, but certainly not an emerging economy. Tony Leon, the then leader of the DP warned repeatedly that all this would come back to bite the country in terms of a loss of jobs, of stunted growth and far too much power in the hands of the unions. Mboweni arrogantly refused to listen. Today those same people have turned their backs on him because he knows and the unions know he thinks Tony Leon was right all along. Mboweni, instead of spending his time tweeting, should re-read the Constitution of South Africa to remind himself that the government does not rule, it merely governs at the pleasure of the people. Douglas Gibson is a former opposition chief whip and former ambassador to Thailand. His website is: Douglasgibsonsouthafrica.com. This article first appeared in The Star