Media Release: Update on the Coronavirus by Premier Alan Winde- provincial PPE supplies doubled in the past week 6 May 2020 As of 1pm on 6 May, the Western Cape has recorded 3771 confirmed cases of COVID-19 infection. Total confirmed COVID-19 cases 3771 Total recoveries 1122 Total deaths 72 Total active cases (currently infected patients) 2577 Total number of tests 48168 Patients in hospital 150 with 62 in ICU or high care Sub Districts Cape Town Metro: Sub-district Cases Western 536 Southern 344 Northern 234 Tygerberg 687 Eastern 377 Klipfontein 381 Mitchells Plain 288 Khayelitsha 478 Total 3325 Sub Districts Non-Metro: District Sub-district Cases Garden Route Bitou 5 Garden Route Knysna 14 Garden Route George 14 Garden Route Hessequa 8 Garden Route Mossel Bay 19 Garden Route Oudtshoorn 3 Cape Winelands Stellenbosch 22 Cape Winelands Drakenstein 28 Cape Winelands Breede Valley 28 Cape Winelands Langeberg 3 Cape Winelands Witzenberg 138 Overberg Overstrand 13 Overberg Cape Agulhas 2 Overberg Swellendam 2 Overberg Theewaterskloof 2 West Coast Bergrivier 1 West Coast Saldanha Bay Municipality 4 West Coast Swartland 10    Unallocated: 130 *Data notes: Cases previously reported in Mitchells Plain (2) and Drakenstein (1), have been reallocated as address data has been updated. The Western Cape has recorded an additional 2 COVID-19 deaths-bringing the total number of deaths from the virus in the province to 72. We send our condolences to their family and friends at this time. Personal Protective Equipment: The Western Cape Department of Health has more than doubled PPE stocks on hand in the past week and we now have R102 million worth of stocks on hand- with more on order. The Department has also developed a dashboard that allows them to track the stock holding of each type of PPE at any given time. As equipment is used and new orders are received, this will be reflected on the dashboard. Full PPE kits are provided to medical personnel conducting COVID-19 tests and those treating COVID-19 positive patients. Community healthcare workers receive cloth masks and aprons for their work in the field when dealing with non-COVID cases and surgical masks for when they work with COVID-19 related cases. Our healthcare workers are vital in our response to COVID-19 and their safety is of utmost concern to us but as infections rise, our stocks of PPE will be used up faster. This is another reason why it is absolutely vital for residents to work towards flattening the curve- so that our healthcare systems and stocks are not overwhelmed. Today, the Western Cape Government, in partnership with Wesgro and the City of Cape Town launched a PPE marketplace-a digital platform that connects businesses looking to buy PPE, with companies that make them. The platform allows suppliers to promote their goods, and companies to find suppliers of protective gear. The initial focus is on cloth masks but the range of products will be expanded as new suppliers are brought on board. We encourage businesses making PPE in the province to sign up at https://www.supportbusiness.co.za/marketplace/. Cloth masks: Under the level four regulations, it is mandatory that people leaving their homes wear cloth masks. When worn correctly, cloth masks play an important role in the fight against COVID-19. However, they must be used properly and always together with the golden rules of hygiene. A mask alone will not prevent you from being infected. In order to be most effective, cloth masks must be clean and must be put on, worn and removed correctly. This means only touching the mask by the straps, and washing your hands before putting it on, and after removing it. Never fiddle with the mask or touch the inside. Masks are also only one line of defence and should not replace hand washing and other hygiene measures. Social distancing is always important, even when you are wearing mask. Wearing the mask incorrectly ie. covering only the mouth, or removing it while speaking, defeats the purpose of wearing a mask- which is to reduce the risk of transmission of the virus by sick people. We also call on businesses to ensure that the appropriate measures are being taken to ensure staff safety in the workplace and to enforce mask wearing. Community testing and screening update: The Western Cape Government community screening and testing program has so far screened 284 731 people across the province, and tested 9418 of these. Screening and testing is an important tool in helping us to accurately pinpoint where infections are occurring and where a person does test positive, to start the contact tracing process. Anyone displaying symptoms (dry cough, sore throat, fever or shortness of breath) is advised to call the hotline on 021 928 4102 for directions on what to do next. Testing facilities are available across the province, and the hotline will direct you to the appropriate one. Issued by Office of Western Cape Premier, 6 May 2020 