DA slams KZN Arts and Culture for exclusion of minority group performers during Covid-19 relief concerts 6 May 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) has slammed KwaZulu-Natal’s (KZN) Department of Arts and Culture for excluding minority group artists and cultural organisations during Freedom Day virtual relief concerts held during the current Covid-19 pandemic. Of particular concern to the DA is the skewed nature of relief and support that is being provided to religious and cultural organisations in our province, which we believe are largely raced-based and discriminatory against minority groups. During a portfolio committee meeting of the KZN Arts and Culture held on Tuesday, 5 May 2020, the DA raised this concern, amongst others, with the Department’s representatives. In response, the Department advised that there is poor participation from minority communities in the programmes run by province. The HOD also stated that the present matter should be viewed as ‘water under the bridge’ as more concerts are lined up in forthcoming months. He has, however, welcomed further participation from minority communities. It is the DA’s firm belief that the Department has failed to be inclusive of all KZN’s citizens. It is for this reason that we have submitted a detailed written parliamentary question to MEC Hlengiwe Mavimbela (view here) requesting details around the matter. It is common knowledge that while many businesses have been bearing the brunt of harsh economic times during the lockdown, so too have cultural organisations whose only source of funding from public events has dried up entirely. This poses a massive risk to the future sustainability of cultural and religious groups – many of which work under very difficult circumstances ordinarily – when it comes to keeping these practices alive in our province. Artists from different race groups bring together a diversity of cultures. It is for this reason that the DA is appealing to KZN’s cultural and religious organisations who have been affected by lockdown, to make applications to the Department for support and funding to ensure their future sustainability. Interested parties who form part of these minority groups must apply for funding using the following criteria: Submit documentation that does not deviate from the existing MOA requirements (narrative report, invoices, valid compliance documents etc); Supporting documents: e.g. cancellation letters, proof of payments made to artists/participants/service providers etc. involved and proof of contracts and payment due; and For approved projects without a signed MOA but with a grant letter, all valid compliance documents and action plan (April – June) should be submitted. It is extremely important that minority groups communicate with the Department of Arts and Culture in order to be recognised. They must also ensure that they are listed on an online departmental database which the DA believes must be open and transparent and made open to the public on the Arts and Culture website. This will provide a fair opportunity for all race groups to be part of forthcoming and future programmes within the Department. Social cohesion and moral regeneration must be the corner stone of our democracy and this should be reflected in the Departments relief programme. Decades of hard work and dedication from these many cultural organisations cannot be allowed to disappear into oblivion. Government must do whatever it takes to ensure their continued survival. Issued by Bradley Singh,DA KZN Spokesperson on Arts and Culture, 6 May 2020