ANC statement on the decisions of Cabinet and the National Coronavirus Command Council  23 May 2020 The African National Congress (ANC) appeals to all South African's to support and defend the collective decisions of Cabinet and the National Coronavirus Command Council (NCCC) which are aimed a protecting life's. In this regard the ANC notes with dismay the continuing attacks on Dr. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma for diligently carrying out her duties as the Minister responsible for the coordination of our country's national mitigation efforts, in terms of the Disaster Management Act of 2020. In the pursuit of carrying out her duties Dr. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma is engaged in discussions in Cabinet and the National Coronavirus Command Council (NCCC), under the chairpersonship of President Cyril Ramaphosa. These discussions cover a broad range of issues concerning the development of regulations for the various stages of the gradual lifting of the lockdown. The discussions are supposed to be confidential, until the final decisions of the collective are publicly announced. It must always be remembered that the decisions of Cabinet and the NCCC are collectively taken, and should never be individualised. It is entirely unacceptable that there are evidently wedge drivers, who are in the service of certain businesses. They maliciously attack and undermine our leaders. This is particularly blatant with regards to the proposed continuing ban on the sale of cigarettes, tobacco related products and alcohol. Those who do so show a callous lack of disregard for the health of our citizens, and seem only interested in crass profiteering. We call on Dr. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma to remain focused and to continue with the excellent work that she doing as part of the collective. The ANC welcomes the diligent manner that Cabinet and the NCCC, under the leadership of President Ramaphosa, are carrying out their difficult duties. We fully support the decisions that have been taken. We call on those who are trying to undermine Cabinet and the NCCC, and the decisions that they collectively take, to forthwith cease with their selfish and unpatriotic behavior. In conclusion the ANC once again pledges our full support to President Ramaphosa, Dr. Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma, Dr. Zweli Mkhize, and the entire Cabinet. We commend them for their selfless service, and the outstanding work that they carry out on behalf of our whole nation. Issued by Ace Magashule, Secretary General, ANC, 23 May 2020