Minister Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma on Coronavirus COVID-19 Alert Level 3 religious gatherings 29 May 2020 The Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (COGTA), Dr Nkosazana Dlamini Zuma has after consultations with other cabinet members issued directions on religious gatherings in terms of regulation 37 (1) (a) of the Disaster Management Act, 202 (ActNo.57of202). The purpose of the issued directions in the schedule relates to norms and standards for religious gatherings that are permitted under regulations to address, prevent and combat the spread of COVID-19. After wide consultations with the religious sector, government is now in a position to categorise religious counselling as an essential service. This will enable the millions who have been affected by the virus, to receive this much needed service, since the majority cannot afford professional attention of this nature. The religious gatherings such as church services will be permitted and the phased re-opening will start from 01 June 2020, with maximum of 50 congregants, should the chosen venue be able to accommodate such. Religious organizations should where possible convene services through virtual platforms. Health and safety measures at places of worship should be made a priority, as such all religious leaders or persons in charge must develop plans and protocols on how they will manage the re-opening, whilst ensuring that there are not more than 50 persons within the place of worship at a time. The religious leaders or persons in charge should ensure health, hygiene, social distancing are observed and ensure that every person entering a place of worship wears a cloth face mask covering both mouth and nose. Social distancing is important and should be observed, with no physical contact and ensure that there is 1.5metres between persons. Even with the prescribed social distancing, wearing of masks is compulsory for the duration of the church service. All religious leaders or persons in charge should ensure that any religious ritual that requires personal contact may not be performed during religious activity. Washing of hands or sanitization should be undertaken prior to worship and continually in between the service. As such, every place of worship has to ensure that there are sufficient quantities of hand sanitisers available which all attendees are required to use. Places of worship are required to keep a register which must be retained for a period of six months detailing names, contact details, residential address and contact persons Persons entering places of worship should be screened for symptoms associated with COVID-19, namely cough, fever, sore throat, shortness of breath, or difficulty in breathing. Anyone who presents these symptoms should not be allowed to enter a place of worship. Any persons over the age of 60 years and those with co-morbidities are encouraged to continue worshiping at home. We urge all people to observe a national-day-of-prayer, on Sunday, 31 May 2020 and join in meditation, fellowship and prayer as announced by the President. This day must be observed in the comfort of your homes or through virtual means. All religious  organisations are required to establish COVID-19 committees to establish their state of readiness and to verify the existence of the plans required in terms of these directions before opening for services. Issued by Lungi Mtshali on behalf of Department of Cooperative Governance, 29 May 2020