Media Release: Update on the Coronavirus by Premier Alan Winde 5 May 2020 As of 1pm on 5 May, the Western Cape has recorded 3677 confirmed cases of COVID-19 infection.eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_1',112,'0','0'])); Total confirmed COVID-19 cases 3677 Total recoveries 997 Total deaths 70 Total active cases (currently infected patients) 2610 Total number of tests 47751 Patients in hospital 153 with 55 in high care or ICU Sub Districts Cape Town Metro: Sub-district Cases Western 522 Southern 335 Northern 215 Tygerberg 667 Eastern 373 Klipfontein 370 Mitchells Plain 290 Khayelitsha 474 Total 3246 Sub Districts Non-Metro: District Sub-district Cases Garden Route Bitou 5 Garden Route Knysna 14 Garden Route George 14 Garden Route Hessequa 7 Garden Route Mossel Bay 19 Garden Route Oudtshoorn 3 Cape Winelands Stellenbosch 22 Cape Winelands Drakenstein 29 Cape Winelands Breede Valley 28 Cape Winelands Langeberg 3 Cape Winelands Witzenberg 136 Overberg Overstrand 13 Overberg Cape Agulhas 2 Overberg Swellendam 2 Overberg Theewaterskloof 1 West Coast Bergrivier 1 West Coast Saldanha Bay Municipality 3 West Coast Swartland 10    eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_2',113,'0','0']));Unallocated: 119 *Data notes: Cases previously reported in Knysna and Mitchells Plain, have been reallocated as address data has been updated. The Western Cape has recorded an additional six COVID-19 deaths-bringing the total number of deaths from the virus in the province to 70. We send our condolences to their family and friends at this time. Testing and screening update:eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_3',114,'0','0'])); The Western Cape has screened a total of 267 347 people across the province, and tested 8 838 of these in our active case finding community screening and testing program. In total, the province has tested 47 751 people. The Western Cape data has shown that transmission among members of the community is established, and that the provincial curve is climbing at a faster rate. Flattening this curve requires each and every citizen in the province to act responsibly in order to protect themselves and their loved ones, and to ensure that the sick, the elderly and the vulnerable who will be impacted most severely, are protected. International Hand Hygiene Day: Today marks International Hand Hygiene Day. Handwashing is always important because it is a simple but highly effective way to fight disease and prevent infections. This year, as the world faces the COVID-19 pandemic, handwashing is especially important as we work to stop the spread and flatten the curve. Wash your hands regularly with soap and water for at least 20 seconds to help play your part in stopping COVID-19. Combined with staying at home, practicing physical distancing and wearing a clean, cloth mask, hygiene measures like handwashing, are an effective way to stop the spread of the virus. We call on all workplaces that are currently operational under the level four regulations to ensure their employees safety by providing handwashing facilities, or hand sanitisers, in addition to putting in place measures like social distancing, screening and compulsory mask wearing in the workplace. Safety on public transport: The Western Cape Government's Department of Transport and Public Works has created a reporting mechanism to report unsafe public transport. Residents using public transport can dial *134*234# from their mobile phone to report overfull minibus, midibus, metered or e-hailing taxis, drivers who are not wearing masks, or taxis not supplying hand sanitisers on board. Where people encounter unsafe public transport, we urge them to report it and help to stop the spread. Provincial relief for cultural, creative and sports sectors: Today, the Western Cape Department of Cultural Affairs and Sport announced a provincial relief fund for the cultural, creative and sports sectors. Before the lockdown, the Western Cape was home to thriving cultural, artistic and sports scenes and we are home to many talented artists, musicians and sportsmen and women. Those working in these sectors have been heavily impacted by the cancellation of gatherings, events and sporting fixtures and the province has devised two types of relief- for cultural and creative support and for sports and recreation support. Applications for the fund close on 19 May and more information, including the qualifying criteria and applications forms can be found here https://coronavirus.westerncape.gov.za/news/provincial-relief-cultural-creative-and-sports-sectors #Sharethelove: Today we also announce the launch of our #ShareTheLove campaign which seeks to highlight the great work being done by so many people living in the Western Cape to help each other through the Covid-19 crisis. There are many ways that each of us can play our part, not only in stopping the spread of Covid-19, but also helping each other through this challenging time. Now, more than ever, we need to be kind and considerate to our family, friends and strangers, and I encourage you all to share the love, and post your photos and ideas of how others can also share the love on social media with #sharethelove. Today, my wife Tracy and I had the opportunity to visit Ladles of Love, an NGO working to feed thousands of hungry people in the province, and doing a tremendous job of sharing the love. They are currently operating out of the CTICC, which has allowed them to use the CTICC kitchens, as well as some of their floor space for packing and distribution. Ladles of Love is an organisation that is doing a great job of sharing the love, and you can share the love by supporting them, or any charity in your community. Even the smallest action, like phoning an elderly relative, or buying a food voucher at your local grocery store can make a huge difference to someone. Visit  our website for more information on how you can get involved and #ShareTheLove: https://www.westerncape.gov.za/coronavirus We thank all of those residents who have opened their hearts to help communities across the province and spread love and kindness when it is most needed. Office of the Western Cape Premier, 5 May 2020