Procurement Disclosure Report reveals R1.404 billion spent on Covid-19  1 October 2020 We are pleased to publish the third edition of the Procurement Disclosure Report by Provincial Treasury. This edition of the Procurement Disclosure Report expands on the previous report to include detail on all Covid-19 expenditure by Western Cape public entities for the 2020/21 financial year and confirms that to date R1.404 billion has been committed towards Covid-19 related expenditure across departments and public entities in the Western Cape. For the period 01 April 2020 to 31 August 2020, provincial departments’ total Covid-19 expenditure is R1.402 billion, and provincial public entities’ total Covid-19 expenditure is R2.86 million. Of the total spent on Covid-19 expenditure, R549 million or 39.48% was spent on SMMEs by department and public entities in the Western Cape. The national target requires that 30% of spend goes to SMMEs via sub-contracting mechanisms, and so the Western Cape Government has exceeded this target through direct procurement for the period. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_3',113,'0','0'])); The Procurement Disclosure Report details all personal protective equipment (PPE) procurement and expenditure in the Western Cape in response to the Covid-19 pandemic, in a regular and standardised report that is made available on a monthly, quarterly and annual basis to the public. Minister of Finance and Economic Opportunities, David Maynier, said: “We remain committed to transparency and clean government in the Western Cape, and so welcome the third edition of the Procurement Disclosure Report. It is also important to us that we disclose details of Covid-19 expenditure by our provincial public entities to ensure public funds are spent correctly and we mitigate the risks in supply chain management at all government agencies.” Provincial Treasury Head of Department, David Savage, added: “The Western Cape Government has always been a leader in public procurement reform, and this has enabled us to continue to lead the way in enhancing transparency in disaster-related procurement.”  eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_4',114,'0','0'])); Other pro-active support and compliance measures implemented by Provincial Treasury to mitigate procurement risks include the establishment of a Central Procurement Advisory Committee to support and advise the main procuring departments and enhanced surveillance of disaster-related procurement by internal audits of procurement transactions. To access the Procurement Disclosure Report visit: www.westerncape.gov.za/provincial-treasury/procurement-disclosure-report For more information and to submit feedback or suggestion on improvements to the Public Disclosure Report please email to our Supplier Helpdesk. Issued by Francine Higham, Spokesperson for the Provincial Minister of Finance and Economic Opportunities (Responsible for the Provincial Treasury and the Department of Economic Development and Tourism), 1 October 2020eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-4','ezslot_0',115,'0','0']));