STATEMENT BY GAUTENG PREMIER DAVID MAKHURA ON THE LATEST REPORT OF THE SIU PERTAINING TO HEALTH MEC, DR BANDILE MASUKU Last week Friday, 2 October 2020, I received an updated report from the Special Investigating Unit (SIU) pertaining to the role of the MEC for Health, Dr. Bandile Masuku, whom I had placed on special leave since 30 July 2020. The finding of the SIU is that Health MEC, Dr. Bandile Masuku, has failed to execute his functions in compliance with the Constitution and the Public Finance Management Act (PFMA). Based on this finding, the SIU has recommended that the Premier should take administrative action against MEC Masuku for the purpose of determining his suitability to hold office as the responsible MEC for Health. With regard to the substantive public interest matter of whether the MEC was involved in any acts of corruption and or collusion regarding the procurement of PPE, the SIU reported that their investigation is still ongoing. It is a matter of public interest and a grave concern for clean governance that the investigation into this matter is concluded and that the facts are established as soon as possible. Based on the SIU's report, I have decided to discharge Dr. Bandile Masuku from his responsibilities as the Gauteng MEC for Health. I have taken cognisance of the contribution that MEC Masuku has made in improving the Department of Health since his appointment and appreciate the leadership he provided during Gauteng's response to COVID-19 pandemic. Accordingly, I have further decided that I will only appoint the new MEC for Health once the SIU has reached finality on its investigation into allegations of corruption and collusion. It is only when this investigation is completed that I will be able to fully arrive at an objective determination of Dr. Masuku's suitability to hold office as the MEC for Health in Gauteng. However, allegations of corruption and abuse of power must always be viewed in a very serious light and those responsible must face the full might of the law. We will never waiver where conclusive evidence point to wrongdoing. In this regard, I keenly await the conclusion of the SIU investigations into allegations of corruption and collusion. Should Dr Masuku be cleared of any acts of corruption and collusion, I will confidently consider reappointing him as the MEC for Health. MEC Jacob Mamabolo will continue to act as the MEC for Health until further notice. I have also requested the Minister of Health, Dr. Zweli Mkhize, to provide further support to the Gauteng Department of Health by deploying a team of experts to reinforce the work of current senior management team. This request stems from the fact that several senior managers are either on suspension or they have resigned due to the ongoing SIU investigation into irregular PPE procurement. Statement issued by the office of the Gauteng Premier, 9 October 2020