Cape Town dam levels increase to 100,8% 5 October 2020 The total capacity of dams supplying the Cape Town metro increased from 99,5% to 100,8% between 28 September and 4 October 2020, a 1,3% rise from the previous week. Water consumption for the same period increased by nine million litres per day from an average of 651 million litres per day the previous week to 660 million litres per day. At the same time last year, dam levels were at 81,9%. ‘As the dam levels have topped the 100% mark, the City wants to thank Team Cape Town for the whole-of-society effort. Along with the good rains, we have collectively contributed to the region reaching this historic moment. ‘Together, we can all raise a glass of water to the collective effort that brought us to this point of plenty. After six long years of waiting for good rains, with a period of severe scarcity and rationing, seeing the dams reach this milestone capacity is a triumph for the city. ‘While residents’ recent water savings have been integral to dams reaching this level, we must also acknowledge the groundwork which was done in the years before the Day Zero scare. Before the brush with Day Zero, we had already achieved great success in building resilience through the implementation of the water demand management policies since the early 2000s. Five years ago, just before the Day Zero scare, the City’s water demand management programme was internationally recognised for its success in adapting to climate change, winning the Adaptation Implementation category at the 2015 C40 Cities awards,’ said Mayoral Committee Member for Water and Waste, Alderman Xanthea Limberg.   eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_3',113,'0','0'])); With regards to water restrictions and tariffs, Alderman Limberg said any decisions in this regard will be mindful of residents’ praiseworthy relationship with water, and the City will seek to find an arrangement most beneficial to residents, and one that is sustainable for our water security. ‘Consultations around appropriate tariffs and restrictions for the 2020/21 hydrological year (which runs from 1 November to 31 October) are currently taking place. Tariffs are currently on the second lowest level possible in terms of the City’s 2020/21 Budget, and have come down significantly since the peak of the drought. The no restriction, water-wise tariff which is under consideration, will provide some relief if implemented, but the possibility of tariff relief must be balanced against the extra funds needed to build additional resilience against climate change by investing in future water sources. We must also take into account the projected increase of the proportion of residents needing indigent support, in part due to the deteriorated national economic climate,’ said Alderman Limberg. In a few short years, we have gone from the worst drought to face our city and a potential ‘Day Zero’, to the real prospect of zero water restrictions besides the need to stay water-wise.eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_4',114,'0','0'])); ‘Even though we need to continue being mindful of climate uncertainty, residents can in the short-term begin to relax water saving efforts in good conscience due to the significant increase in dam levels. Should residents be comfortable enough to relax savings efforts, the related increased consumption levels will assist the City to cover costs while lowering water tariffs from the current second lowest tariff level, to the lowest, no restriction, water-wise tariff,’ said the Executive Mayor of Cape Town, Alderman Dan Plato. Issued by Media Office, City of Cape Town, 5 October 2020