COGTA Committee urges City of Tshwane to be responsive to needs of stakeholders 15 October 2020 The Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) has called on the City of Tshwane Metropolitan Municipality to enhance its stakeholder relations strategy to ensure that community issues are addressed early. “Section 152 (1)(e) of the Constitution enjoins municipalities to encourage the involvement of communities and community organisations in the matters of local government. It is in this context that the committee is of the view that effective stakeholder relations are central to efficiency of a municipality,” said Ms Faith Muthambi, the Chairperson of the committee. The committee interacted with stakeholders within the municipality to hear their first-hand experiences of service delivery within the city. The committee reemphasised its concern that the City’s relationships with stakeholders are deficient. This is exacerbated by dysfunctional ward committees, following the dissolution of this critical pillar of consultative government. The committee reiterated its call for a comprehensive outline of the national Department of Cogta’s view on the functionality and future of the ward committee model. The unintended consequence of ineffective stakeholder relations is disgruntled communities who litigate against the municipality, diverting limited resources from essential service delivery towards legal costs. Furthermore, service delivery protests could be reduced with effective stakeholder engagement. The committee appreciates the commitment of church leaders to work with the City in fostering positive relations with communities and a collaborative effort in dealing with the social needs of city residents. The committee encouraged the City to take advantage of the willingness of churches to collaborate with the City for the benefit of the people. The committee further resolved to convene a virtual interaction with traditional leaders aimed at strengthening relations and addressing challenges in this critical institution of governance. Issued by Malatswa Molepo, Media Officer, Parliamentary Communication Services, 15 October 2020