DA to lay criminal charges against Malema and Paulsen for inciting violence 11 October 2020 Tomorrow the Democratic Alliance (DA) will lay criminal charges against the EFF leader, Julius Malema, and EFF Member of Parliament, Nazier Paulsen, for social media post that incite violence. On Wednesday Malema tweeted: “Magwala a chechele morago! (Cowards move to the back) Fighters attack!” and as a follow-up, over the weekend, he tweeted a picture of a machine gun. His tweets were in response to a protests by farmers in Senekal in the Frees State last week. Echoing Malema's brazen incitement of violence, Western Cape EFF MP posted a picture with a machine gun captioned “Get ready!”. These inflammatory utterances are a serious offence, especially by members of Parliament who are bound by an Oath of Office. In what constitutional democracy in the world will elected public representatives be allowed to openly and.publicly incite racial warfare? The DA will not allow it to happen here. This kind of rhetoric has no place in our country We call on the Minister of Police, Bheki Cele, to act against Malema and Paulsen and ensure that their war talk, and incitement to commit violence is investigated criminally. We also call on President Cyril Ramaphosa to publicly condemn the EFF, and for Parliament to investigate and take necessary action against them. For too long Julius Malema and his thugs have gotten away with this kind of behaviour. In the abscence of accoutability for the actions and utterances, they feel increasingly emboldened to say and do what they want. South Africans are sick of it. It is time that Julius Malema and his gang of thugs face accountability for their actions and utterances. It is time that the Minister of Police and the President of the country makes their voices heard. The DA will not rest until this happens. I will lay charges tomorrow at the Cape Town police station and release the details of this in the morning. Issued by Natasha Mazzone, Chief Whip of the Official Opposition, 11 October 2020