EFF CONDEMNS WORKER EXPLOITATION BY THE ANC Thursday, 01 October 2020 The Economic Freedom Fighters condemns the consistent abuse and exploitation by the ruling party, the ANC, which has failed to pay its employees on time for months on end. As recently as the 29th of September 2020, the ANC notified its employees that they would be paid no later than 9 October 2020, a date well into the next month, in which these employees will continue working. This essentially constitutes unpaid labour. Month after month the public has witnessed statements from the ruling party which with no remorse or consideration, informing employees that they will be paid significantly later than the agreed dates at the end of the month. As the EFF, we are duty-bound to call out the exploitation of workers, even if it is within the confines of other political parties. These employees are bound by contract, have dependents and bills to service. The actions of the ANC place the dignity and financial integrity of its employees at risk. We, therefore, condemn the actions of the ANC as nothing less than exploitation and an infringement on the financial security of employees. The employees of the ruling party, who are subject to uncertainty regarding their salaries have bills to pay and responsibilities to meet. They have debit orders to service, school fees to pay and at the most basic level have to meet the daily needs of food and transport. The precarious position they are put in by a ruling party that is failing to manage its financial affairs is shameful, and this must be an indicator to the country that an organisation that cannot run its own internal financial affairs cannot possibly lead the economic development of the state. We encourage all employees of the ruling party to approach the EFF Labour Desk to seek recourse for what is a perpetual state of financial insecurity. The EFF will defend these employees without fail from the exploitation they are faced with in a ruling party that simply cannot sustain itself or those in its employ. Statement issued by the EFF, 1 October 2020 