Statement of the ANC on the Economic Recovery Plan announcement by President Ramaphosa 15 October 2020 The African National Congress (ANC) welcomes and supports the Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan as announced by the Republic of South Africa's (RSA) President Cyril Ramaphosa in Parliament today. Our countries economy was already in a precarious state characterized by sluggish growth, rising unemployment and poverty even before the pandemic could hit our shores. The economic recovery plan is a bold and decisive intervention which must be embraced by all. The recovery plan responds to the call for sustainable economic growth and job creation through, among other things, energy security, unlocking investment especially in infrastructure, reduce data cost and resuscitate vulnerable sectors such as tourism. The ANC further applauds government efforts to create and support over 800,000 work opportunities. The economic recovery plan recognises that the most urgent task confronting the country is the preservation of existing jobs, creation of new jobs and addressing deep structural challenges of unemployment, poverty and inequality. The Economic Recovery Plan affirms the resolutions of the recent ANC NEC Lekgotla which sought to refocus the attention of the nation on a few catalytic interventions that will stimulate growth, protect businesses and create jobs. We applaud the emphasis on localisation, including maximising the use of South African materials and construction companies as well as the use of labour-intensive methods. This will unlock the economic potential of our nation and boost the job creation efforts and thus ease the burden of poverty and unemployment. In addition, we note and applaud the focus in the following specific key areas: - A renewed determination to achieve sufficient, secure and reliable energy supply within two years. - A large-scale employment stimulus to create new work opportunities and protect existing jobs - A renewed support to grow South African businesses and increase exports - Over R1 trillion in infrastructure investment commitment over the next four years - Almost 14 000 MW of new energy generation capacity to be procured by 2022 - Focus on small businesses and cooperatives as well as township economic development We welcome the President's appreciation that the fight against crime and corruption is an integral part of the economic recovery plan. No sustainable economic growth and effective service delivery can take place in conditions that enable corruption to thrive and allow those who hijack service delivery to go unpunished. Those who steal from the poor must have no place to hide. They must face the full might of the law. We must be firm and expeditious in dealing with the demon of corruption, whether in the private or public sector regardless of who is involved. The ANC further takes comfort from the fact that the plan is accompanied by clear timeframes and monitoring mechanisms which will be led by the President to ensure effective implementation. We therefore call on the rest of society to work side by side with the Government to ensure that the economic recovery plan is fully implemented and realised. Lastly, the ANC welcomes the decision to extend the COVID-19 special grant by a further three months. This gesture is a demonstration of a caring government and an important building block towards the introduction of a basic income grant. Issued by Pule Mabe, ANC National Spokesperson, 15 October 2020