Proposed Township Economy Bill seeks to drive foreign nationals out of townships 17 October 2020 The Democratic Alliance (DA) in Gauteng is deeply concerned that the proposed Gauteng Township Economy Bill’s main aim is to drive foreign nationals out of townships. We should be looking at building inclusive communities where residents benefit from each other rather than segregating people on the basis of nationality. The manner in which the Bill has being put forward is reminiscent of apartheid spatial planning, which seeks to have designated areas of trade and living for people based on nationality. This is contrary to the principles of democracy, the Constitution as well as what is set out in the immigration act, which makes sure that foreign nationals living in the country are afforded rights in South Africa. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));In its current form the Bill discriminates against foreign nationals and fuels xenophobia in our communities at a time when we need each other. The Bill has also not considered the changed nature of where South Africans live and work; it also has the potential to encourage fronting and drive township enterprises underground resulting in more informality in the economy. Furthermore, current entities like the Gauteng Enterprise Propeller (GEP) should be used to equip township businesses with the necessary skills needed to grow and run a successful business. The DA believes that we should not see foreign nationals in South Africa as a threat but as partners in rebuilding our ailing economy. This is an opportunity for skills and knowledge transfer. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_2',114,'0','0']));The DA will be making comprehensive input on the Bill and once the Bill has been tabled before the portfolio committee we will call on the public to comment on the Bill. Issued by Makashule Gana, DA Gauteng Shadow MEC for Economic Development, 17 October 2020