NCOP delegates not resignation of Mayor of Govan Mbeki Local Municipality 29 October 2020 Mpumalanga permanent delegates to the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) have noted the resignation of the Mayor of Govan Mbeki Local Municipality, following the release of a forensic report implicating her and some councillors in allegations of maladministration. The resignation happened two days before the NCOP delegation’s visit to the municipality where the mayor and the provincial Department of Cooperative Governance were to brief members of Parliament and the Legislature on the state of governance in the municipality. The visit is part of the NCOPs Provincial Week 2020 with the theme “Ensuring capable and financially sound municipalities”. The focus in Mpumalanga was on Emalahleni, Lekwa and Govan Mbeki local municipalities. The MEC for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Mr Mandla Msibi, told the NCOP members and members of the Provincial Legislature that the plans were under way to place the municipality under administration, due to a collapse in governance. Govan Mbeki, as with Lekwa and Emalahleni, is indebted to Eskom, owing an amount of over R2 billion to the power utility. The municipality also owes Rand Water over R317 million and has made an arrangement for weekly payments to service the debt. The NCOP also heard that the municipal manager is on suspension while a court process is underway to repeal the appointment of the Chief Financial Officer due lack of requisite qualifications. “We have noted a number of serious challenges, which include the forensic investigation and the resignation of the mayor. We will monitor the developments and our interest is to see the restoration of good governance in this municipality. “We also appreciate the hard work by the MEC and the intervention at Govan Mbeki. We hope the planned Section 139 intervention will assist to root out maladministration and bring back good governance and effective service delivery,” said Ms Audrey Maleka, leader of the Mpumalanga delegation in the NCOP. Issued by Sakhile Mokoena, Media Officer, Parliamentary Communication Services, 29 October 2020