EFF extends its gratitude to members and ground forces for a successful protest at Senekal  16 October 2020 The EFF extends its appreciation to the disciplined leadership, members and ground forces of the EFF for a successful protest at Senekal in the Free State. Fighters conducted themselves with utmost discipline in the face of provocative racists who carried arms into a town where a peaceful defence of state property and the Constitution was taking place. Today was a sharp reminder to all those who wish to undermine the judiciary and conduct themselves in a manner that threatens the lives of others that they will be met toe to toe by the militant economic emancipation movement. As a result of the presence of the EFF, not a single racist attempted to cause any damage to the Court or storm it, and all arrogance which was witnessed a few weeks ago at Senekal dwindled into insignificance. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));The war against racism and right-wingers, who wish to opportunistically raise farm murders as a crisis, in order to undermine the agenda for land expropriation must be exposed for the foolishness that it is. Crime is a problem in South Africa which must be addressed where it is most prevalent, and at this current stage, the worst crimes occur in the war against the women and children of this country. The EFF is fully conscious of the storming of Courts by the racists in Senekal was a decoy to intimidate the democratic government from the amendment of section 25 of the Constitution which will allow for expropriation of land without compensation. One of the racist demands when they disrupted the Court, shot bullets inside a Court, burned police vehicles and threatened the lives of black people was that their stooge, Cyril Ramaphosa must stop stating the fact that the land that they occupy was stolen. We will never be diverted from the land question and will do everything in our power to repossess all the land illegally in white people's ownership and control. We are not afraid of white racists and will carry the struggle to its logical conclusion, which is the total reclamation of our land. The EFF will continue to confront any and all white supremacist behaviour no matter what doomsayers and cowards may have to say. The honeymoon for racists is over. and we thank the leadership and membership of the EFF for sending a strong message to all those who seek to take this country back to a dark past, eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-4','ezslot_2',114,'0','0']));We send a strong warning against any racist formation that intends to undermine courts and institutions of the State that they will always be met with the militancy and radicalism of the EFF. The time of racists and racism in South Africa. must come to an end. and the EFF .1i dependably be at the forefront of confronting racists. We call on all the people of South Africa, black people, in particular, to escape from their cowardice and join the EFF struggles to repossess our land and confront racism wherever it rears its ugly head. It's No retreat! No surrender! Victory is Certain! Issued by the EFF, 16 October 2020