Economic Freedom Fighters statement on the appointment of RanjeniMunusamy as political secretary of the Minister of Finance 21 October 2020 eval(ez_write_tag([[300,250],'politicsweb_co_za-box-3','ezslot_0',112,'0','0']));The Economic Freedom Fighters rejects with contempt the appointment of RanjeniMunusamy as the Political Secretary to the Minister of Finance Tito Mboweni. RanjeniMunusamy is an ex-Journalist, ex-employee of the Friends of Jacob Zuma Trust and the recipient of inexplicable money from the intelligence slush funds. One of the credible witnesses at the Commission on State Capture presented undisputed evidence that Ranjeni Munusamy has been on the payroll of an intelligence slush fund. This has not been disputed, despite her initial threats to challenge this compelling evidence. Munusamy has since gone undercover effectively confirming that she has indeed received unexplained, unaccounted and unlawful money from the intelligence slush funds. For a Minister of Finance to employ such a discredited and compromised human being to such a serious responsibility is not only irresponsible, but it is also reckless, dangerous and outrightly irrational. It is outrightly irrational because a political secretary of the Minister of Finance has a very influential voice in the country's fiscal and economic policies and further has an influence on the guidance of the entities under national treasury. eval(ez_write_tag([[580,400],'politicsweb_co_za-medrectangle-3','ezslot_1',113,'0','0']));The EFF is aware that there are so many discredited individuals in the National Treasury, but the appointment of RanjeniMunusamy is taking it too far. We demand that the Minister of Finance must immediately discontinue any contractual and employment relationship with RanjeniMunusamy until the, thus far solid and believable, allegations have been cleared beyond any reasonable doubt. We give the Minister a period of 7 days to discontinue the employment of RanjeniMunusamy, or we will approach the relevant authorities and institutions to do it on his behalf. We make this demand because we will not stand by and do nothing when State institutions are being infiltrated by a Cabal of highly compromised individuals. We are fully aware where these appointments are initiated and processed and in the same way we fought and defeated the Gupta criminal syndicate, we will defeat the Cabal and Rogue Unit criminal syndicate that is capturing strategic sectors of the State. Issued by the EFF, 21 October 2020