In-principle approval granted for Rondebosch Golf Club lease renewal, with new cancellation clause The City of Cape Town’s Mayoral Committee (Mayco) has granted in-principle approval of the lease renewal application submitted by the Rondebosch Golf Club with the addition of a cancellation clause. The proposed term is for the revised period of 10 years with the introduction of a two-year cancellation clause should Council contemplate a different usage for these erven. This is in line with a professional recommendation which served before the Mayco from the City’s Property Management Department on Tuesday 20 October 2020. The in-principle approval will now be placed on the City Council agenda for 29 October 2020. The current lessee is a registered Not-for-Profit organisation and will be responsible for the estimated R6 million annual maintenance and security cost of the property, aside from the R10 000 per annum golf tariff applicable to all courses on City land for the 2020/21 financial year. Economic and community benefits The proposed property usage benefits the community economically, socially, and creates employment opportunities. Cape Town drives the region’s firm share of golf tourism at over 46% to 50% of the overseas and domestic markets, with a R226 million local economic contribution from golf players alone according to a 2015 study. The City also hosts a number of Sunshine Tour tournaments, extending the industry’s economic, job creation and tourism benefit beyond the social game. Rondebosch Golf Club plays a meaningful role in the Cape Town golfing community, with a diverse membership and successful youth development programme. The Club’s community benefits include a multi-use facility and publicly accessible parkland while contributing to employment, all at no cost to the City. Charity golf events are a regular fixture at the club, with no charge for the use of the venue. Development constraints, wetlands and river ecosystem health The property is zoned for Community Facility Use and Public Open Space due to severe development constraints and environmental reasons. These constraints primarily include: The course is situated within a high flood-line/wetland and thus prone to flooding. The golf course was designed to provide a holding area for the on-site storage of floodwaters, to prevent flooding of the adjacent area Access limitations for vehicles and public transport, with no access points along the 1,5km extent of this elongated property with the Black River running through it The golf course further plays an important role in managing water pollution in the Black River Ecosystem. Focus on more affordable human settlement opportunities The City’s Spatial Planning and Environment as well as Human Settlement Directorates have confirmed that the property is not suitable for housing purposes at this point, with a two-year cancellation clause built into the lease agreement should this position change. While the Rondebosch site has severe development constraints, lease renewals for golf courses on City-owned land should not be confused with a final decision on whether or not future housing would be built on a property, which is a separate legislative process entirely. The City’s draft Human Settlements Strategy, which is out for public comment until 30 November 2020 is clear that all municipal land is being assessed for its human settlements potential, including golf courses. The strategy calls for innovative thinking around accommodation types, partnership-driven developments in urban centres, and the consideration of suitable land not used before for housing, such as golf courses. All workable options continue to be explored in a balanced and holistic manner and in accordance with due process to see how to enable the increase of affordable accommodation stock in Cape Town and to enable greater spatial transformation in the city. Options that would be considered under the strategy include the potential reduction in size of a golf course to incorporate or leverage income generating compatible uses, which may include infill housing opportunities. Lease renewal to serve before Council The in-principle approval of the lease renewal for the Rondebosch Gold Club will now serve before City Council on 29 October, with a final report due to serve before Council at a later stage in terms of the process. During the public comment period, a total of 1 682 Objections were received via Ndifuna Ukwazi, which includes one formal objection, 316 signed submissions, 1 116 online submissions, and 249 petition signatures. Further objections were received via a petition (100 signatures) and 45 General Public online submissions. Objections related to the use of the site for housing, addressing spatial inequality, and the golf course tariff. A total of 95 comments were received via the Sybrandt Park Civic Association representing local residents which supported the lease renewal. Further comment was received from the Pinelands Ratepayers and Residents Association and 17 General Public online submissions. All objections and comments were taken into account in the professional recommendations made by the City’s Property Management Department. Statement issued by City of Cape Town, 21 October 2020