NEHAWU suspends strike at NSFAS 20 October 2020 The National Education, Health and Allied Workers’ Union [NEHAWU] has reached an agreement with the National Student Financial Aid Scheme [NSFAS] to suspend a 8 days long strike which was as a result of a wage deadlock. The strike is suspended pending full implementation of the settlement agreement. After marathon negotiations we were able to win the following victories for our members and workers: Salary increases Parties agreed on the following in terms of salary increases: Workers on salary level 3 to 8 will receive a 6% salary increase Workers on salary level 9 to 10 will receive a 3% salary increase While workers on salary level 11 to 12 will receive a 1% salary increase. Implementation of the above salary percentages will take place at the end of October 2020 through a special run. Salaries shall be backdated to the 1st April 2020. Furthermore, workers who are on salary level 3 to 8 will also receive a non-recurring once off payment of R1 457.00 of which 271 of our members and workers will benefit. As part of the agreement, the NSFAS management agreed and committed itself that no one shall be victimized for having participated on the protected strike by NEHAWU. The national union will refer the matter of job evaluations implementation to the Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA), however, the employer shall make efforts to finalise the matter in an EXCO meeting to be convened on the 15th of November 2020. Parties agreed that the items listed below must be deferred to the National Bargaining Forum [NBF] and shall be concluded before the end of November 2020. Human Resource Policies Pension Fund Housing Allowance eval(ez_write_tag([[336,280],'politicsweb_co_za-banner-1','ezslot_4',116,'0','0']));Medical Aid service providers including the brokerage. Lastly, parties further agreed to attend a workshop in relationship building and further attend a pre-salary negotiations workshop to be facilitated by the CCMA before the 2021 negotiations commences. As NEHAWU, we want to applaud our members and workers for their resilience and militancy during the strike. This strike should serve as an inspiration to other workers that when workers are determined, resolute and united behind a common goal they can achieve their goals. The national union will continue to fight for decent salaries and safe working conditions for all its members and workers. Furthermore, we will continue to partake in the transformation of NSFAS including playing a crucial role in changing its orientation from being a loan scheme into a subsidiary vehicle for free education for deserving students especially those from working class background. Issued by Khaya Xaba, NEHAWU Secretariat, 20 October 2020 