Resignation of CSA Board of Directors Mon, 26th October 2020 Following a meeting of the Members’ Council of yesterday, Sunday, 25 October 2020 held to discuss a roadmap for Cricket South Africa (CSA), the Members’ Council received and accepted resignations from all the Board members. All resignations are with immediate effect except for three members, namely, Zola Thamae, John Mogodi and Donovan May, who will remain as directors until the interim board structure has been appointed to ensure the continuity and stability of the organisation. Rihan Richards, who was appointed Acting President of the Members’ Council, will, in accordance with the provisions of the CSA Memorandum of Incorporation, be Chairperson of the Board and thus the fourth member of the Board. “The Members’ Council sincerely thanks every member who diligently served on the Board, and selflessly sacrificed their time for extended and often, overwhelming periods, to assist Cricket South Africa in addressing some very burdensome conditions. We appreciate their commitment to cricket, and despite the turbulent economic climate, Cricket South Africa, under their leadership, received an unqualified audit for the financial year ending 30 April 2020. We wish them well in their future endeavours,” concluded Richards. Previous: Resignation of CSA Board Members Sun, 25th October 2020 The Members’ Council of Cricket South Africa (CSA) met on Thursday, 22 October 2020 to discuss various matters including what is in the best interest of cricket, as well as the organisation. The meeting was an analysis of several scenarios that were put on the table by the Board, who met on Wednesday, 21 October 2020 to discuss the best way forward for CSA and cricket. “Cricket South Africa would like to inform you of the resignations of its Acting President, Mr Beresford Williams; Mr Tebogo Siko, President of the Northerns Cricket Union; Mr Angelo Carolissen, President of Boland Cricket Union; Mr John Mogodi, Deputy President of Limpopo Impala Cricket; and Mr Donovan May, President of the Eastern Province Cricket Union. The resignations were handed in at the meeting of the Members’ Council held on Sunday, 25 October 2020,” said Rihan Richards. Mr Williams has resigned both from the Board and the Members’ Council while others had resigned as Board Members but would remain on the Members’ Council. The Members’ Council has appointed Rihan Richards as the Acting President of the Members’ Council. “CSA thanks them for their dedication, commitment and service to CSA and wishes them well in their future endeavours’, concluded Richards. Issued by Cricket SA, 25 and 26 October 2020