EFF CONDEMNS THE COWARDICE OF SAPS AMIDST VIOLENT PROTESTS BY WHITE-PEOPLE Tuesday, 6 October 2020 The Economic Freedom Fighters condemns the pathetic cowardice of the South African Police Services (SAPS) when confronted with violence and aggression by white people. In what was a blatant sign of a lack of respect for their puppet-regime and it's authority, white people vandalised, tipped over and burnt police vehicles outside a South African court of law. These individuals, arrogant as a result of this ANC-led government which suffers from low self-esteem and a fear of whiteness, committed these violent acts knowing very well no force would be shown against them because of the colour of their skins. Unlike the countless times where we have seen law enforcement use force against black people who protest peacefully for genuine issues, the white men who terrorised police outside a court of law operated with impunity. This is in stark contrast to the Marikana mineworkers who were massacred while retreating and shot-down like dogs in various locations around the Koppie. It was unlike the brave #FeesMustFall generation who were constantly confronted by rubber bullets, teargas and at times live ammunition while demonstrating on campuses and in front of parliament. There are no reported arrests of these aggressive acts by white people. It is a strong affirmation that truly it is the black skin that is welcoming to violence and disrespect. It confirms that it is the black skin that is automatically the skin of criminals. Not a single rubber bullet was fired at these white people, and this is on the sole basis that that white skin commands respect in this country while black lives do not matter. Cyril Ramaphosa, who is a pet of white-monopoly capital, has put this country at the mercy of his masters. They block roads without being dispersed and bum police vehicles with no repercussions because they know full well that their boy is in charge, and there will be no consequences for them. The EFF calls for the immediate arrest of each and every white person that was part of the disrespect of law enforcement and burning of state-property. Failure to do this will effectively mean that this country is under the firm control of a white-militia that renders this country ungovernable with no consequences. We further call for an inquiry on all police officers who were present as to why these actions continued with no intervention measures. Too many student activists have languished in jail, been traumatised and suspended and expelled by trigger happy police officers who shake in their boots when confronted by the violence of whites. We reiterate that Cyril Ramaphosa's reign as a President is one that is controlled by Stellenbosch and the Oppenheimers. So long as he remains at the helm of political power in this country, violent white people will continue to treat this country like their playground. Statement issued by EFF, 6 October 2020